=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 000866-22 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
Republic of the Philippines
City of Davao
Office of the Sangguniang Panlungsod

19th City Council
4th Regular Session
Series of 2022

PRESENT:
Councillor Edgar P. Ibyuan Jr.
Councillor Ralph O. Abella
Councillor Nilo A. Abellera
Councillor Bai Hundra Cassandra Dominique N. Advincula
Councillor Wilberto E. Al-ali
Councillor Antonio B. Balaguer Sr.
Councillor Conrado C. Baluran
Councillor Jessica M. Bonguyan
Councillor Louie John J. Bonguyan
Councillor Pilar C. Braga
Councillor Augusto Javier G. Campos III
Councillor Danilo C. Dayanghirang
Councillor Emmanuel C. Dayawan
Councillor Edwin A. Dela Cruz Sr.
Councillor Richlyn N. Justol-Baguilod
Councillor Pamela A. Librado-Morata
Councillor Diosdado Angelo Junior R. Mahipus
Councillor Rodolfo M. Mande
Councillor Jaffaar U. Marhothomsalic
Councillor Myrna G. L'Dalado-Ortiz
Councillor Josepina M. Santiago-Castrodes
Councillor Alberto T. Ungab
Councillor Mary Joselle D. Villafuerte
Councillor Jesus Joseph P. Zozobrado III

ABSENT:
Vice Mayor Sebastian Z. Duterte
Councillor Bonifacio E. Militar
Councillor J. Melchor B. Quitain Jr.

ORDINANCE NO. 0866-22
Series of 2022

AN ORDINANCE UPDATING THE ORGANIZATIONAL
STRUCTURE OF THE CITY DISASTER RISK REDUCTION
AND MANAGEMENT OFFICE (CDRMMO) AND PROVIDING
FUNDS THEREOF, SUBJECT TO ALL LAWS AND EXISTING
LEGAL RULES AND REGULATIONS

--- [Page 2] ---
Page 2 of 54
Ord. No. 0866-22

Be it ordained by the Sangguniang Panlungsod of Davao City in session assembled,

that:

SECTION 1. TITLE - This Ordinance shall be known as "AN ORDINANCE UPDATING THE ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE OF THE CITY DISASTER RISK REDUCTION AND MANAGEMENT OFFICE (CDRRMO) AND PROVIDING FUNDS THEREOF, SUBJECT TO ALL LAWS AND EXISTING LEGAL RULES AND REGULATIONS".

SECTION 2. DECLARATION OF PRINCIPLES AND POLICIES

A. Section 3 Rule 1 of the Implementing Rules and Regulations of Republic Act No. 10121 Declaration of Policy - It is the Policy of the State to:

a. Uphold the people's constitutional rights to life and property by addressing the root causes of vulnerabilities to disasters, strengthening the country's institutional capacity for disaster risk reduction and management, and building the resilience of local communities to disasters including climate change impacts;

b. Adhere to and adopt the universal norms, principles, and standards of humanitarian assistance such as the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, UN Guiding Principles and Guidelines on Internal Displacement and Durable Solutions, Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW), Convention on the Rights of the Child and the global effort on risk reduction as concrete expression of the country's commitment to overcome human suffering due to recurring disasters;

c. Incorporate internationally accepted principles and guidelines of disaster risk management in the creation and implementation of national, regional, and local sustainable development and poverty reduction strategies, policies, plans, and budgets;

d. Adopt a disaster risk reduction and management approach that is holistic, comprehensive, integrated, and proactive in lessening the socioeconomic and environmental impacts of disasters including climate change, and promote the involvement and participation of all sectors and all stakeholders concerned, at all levels, especially the local community;

e. Develop, promote, and implement a comprehensive National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Plan (NDRRMP) that aims to strengthen the capacity of the national government and the Local Government Units (LGUs), together with partner stakeholders, to build the disaster resilience of communities, and to institutionalize arrangements and measures for reducing disaster risks, including projected climate risks, and enhancing disaster preparedness and response capabilities at all levels;

f. Adopt and implement a coherent, comprehensive, integrated, efficient and responsive disaster risk reduction program incorporated in the development plan at various levels of government adhering to the principles of good

--- [Page 3] ---
Page 3 of 54
Ord. No. 0866-22

governance such as transparency and accountability within the context of poverty alleviation and environmental protection;

g. Mainstream disaster risk reduction and climate change adaptation and mitigation in development processes such as policy formulation, socioeconomic development planning, budgeting, and governance, particularly in the areas of environment, agriculture, water, energy, health, education, poverty reduction, land-use and urban planning, budgeting, and governance, particularly in the areas of environment, planning, public infrastructure, and housing, among others;

h. Institutionalize the policies, structures, coordination mechanisms and programs with continuing budget appropriation on disaster risk reduction from national down to local levels towards building a disaster-resilient nation and communities;

i. Mainstream disaster risk reduction into the peace process and conflict resolution approaches in order to minimize loss of lives and damage to property, and ensure that communities in conflict zones including Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) can immediately go back to their normal lives during periods of intermittent conflicts;

j. Ensure that disaster risk reduction and climate change measures are gender responsive, sensitive to indigenous knowledge systems and cultures, and respectful of human rights;

k. Recognize the local risk patterns across the country and strengthen the capacity of LGUs for disaster risk reduction and management through decentralized powers, responsibilities, and resources at the regional and local levels;

l. Recognize and strengthen the capacities of LGUs and communities in mitigating and preparing for, responding to, and recovering from the impact of disasters;

m. Engage the participation of Civil Society Organizations (CSOs), the private sector and volunteers in the government's disaster risk reduction programs towards complementation of resources and effective delivery of services to the citizenry;

n. Develop and strengthen the capacities of vulnerable and marginalized groups to mitigate, prepare for, respond to, and recover from the effects of disasters;

o. Enhance and implement a program where humanitarian aid workers, communities, health professionals, government aid agencies, donors, and the media are educated and trained on how they can actively support breastfeeding before and during a disaster and/or an emergency; and

--- [Page 4] ---
Page 4 of 54
Ord. No. 0866-22

p. Provide maximum care, assistance, and services to individuals and families affected by disaster, implement emergency rehabilitation projects to lessen the impact of disaster, and facilitate resumption of normal social and economic activities.

B. Section 12 (a) of Republic Act No. 10121 states that "there shall be established a Local Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Office (LDRRMO) in every province, city and municipality, and a BDRRMC in very barangay which shall be responsible for setting the direction, development, implementation and coordination of disaster risk management programs within their territorial jurisdiction."

C. Section 6 of Republic Act No. 10121 states "Section 6. Local Ordinance: The local sanggunian concerned shall enact the appropriate ordinance to create the Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Office (DRRMO) including the allocation of necessary staffing/personnel and budget."

D. Section 13 of Republic Act No. 10121 states "Section 13. Accreditation, Mobilization, and Protection of Disaster Volunteers and National Service Reserve Corps, CSOs, and the Private Sector. - The government agencies, CSOs, private sector, and LGUs may mobilize individuals or organized volunteers to augment their respective personnel complement and logistical requirements in the delivery of disaster risk reduction programs and activities. The agencies, CSOs, private sector, and LGUs concerned shall take full responsibility for the enhancement, maintenance, and recruitment of volunteers, and shall submit the list of volunteers to the OCD through the LDRRMOs for accreditation and inclusion in the database of community disaster volunteers.

A national roster of Accredited Community Disaster Volunteers (ACDV's), National Service Reserve Corps, CSOs and the private sector shall be maintained by the OCD through the LDRRMOs. Accreditation shall be done at the municipal or city level."

E. Rule 6 - Local Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Office (LDRRMO) Section 1 of the Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) of Republic Act No. 10121 states that "There is hereby created an LDRRMO in every province, city and municipality under the Office of the Governor, City or Municipal Mayor, respectively, and a Barangay Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Committee (BDRRMC) in every barangay to be headed by the Punong Barangay."

F. Rule 6 - Local Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Office (LDRRMO) Section 5 of the Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) of Republic Act No. 10121 states "Section 5. The BDRRMC - It shall be a regular committee of the existing BDC and shall be subject thereto. The Punong barangay shall facilitate and ensure the participation of at least two (2) CSO representatives from existing and active community-based people's organizations representing the most vulnerable and marginalized groups in the barangay."

--- [Page 5] ---
Page 5 of 54
Ord. No. 0866-22

G. The Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030 was adopted at the Third UN World Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction in Sendai, Japan on March 18, 2015, and outlines seven clear targets and the following four priorities for action to prevent, reduce, and respond to disasters that cause significant disease risk; (ii) Strengthening disaster risk governance to manage disaster risks; (iii) Investing in disaster reduction for resilience; and (iv) Enhancing disaster preparedness for effective response, and to "Build Back Better" in recovery, rehabilitation, and reconstruction;

H. Davao City Ordinance No. 0368-15, Series of 2015, "An Ordinance Approving the Creation and Establishment of the City Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Office (CDRRMO)", states in "Section 6.1 that the CDRRMO shall be under the Office of the Mayor";

I. National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council (NDRRMC) Memorandum Circular No. 64, Series of 2021 (dated June 8, 2021) established the Guidelines on the Accreditation, Mobilization, and Protection of Community Disaster Volunteers;

J. Philippine National Volunteer Service Coordinating Agency Office Circular No. XIV, Series of 2021 (signed October 1, 2021) - Registration of NGO's engaging DRRM Foreign Volunteers as Volunteer Mobilizing Organizations (VMOs). Pursuant to NDRRMC Memorandum Circular 64, of 2021.

K. Project NOAH – Department of Science and Technology's (DOST) response for a more accurate, integrated, and responsive disaster prevention and mitigation system, especially in high-risk areas throughout the Philippines. The Project will harness technologies and management services for disaster risk reduction activities offered by the DOST, DOST-Science, DOST-ROLOCs, and the DOST-Advanced Science and Technology Institute (ASTI), in partnership with the UP National Institute of Geological Sciences and the UP College of Engineering.

Project NOAH (Nationwide Operational Assessment of Hazard) is the Philippines' primary disaster risk reduction and management program. Currently under the University of the Philippines, it was initially administered by the Department of Science and Technology (DOST) from 2012 to 2017.

SECTION 3. DEFINITION OF TERMS AND ACRONYMS

Expansion
The increase of something in size, number or importance (Cambridge Dictionary)

Conversion
The process of converting something from one thing to another (Cambridge Dictionary)

Organizational Structure
Defined as the process of creating an organizational structure. The challenge for managers is to design an organizational structure that allows employees to work effectively and efficiently. It is how job duties are formally divided, and the conditions under which they are performed. When designing or changing the structure, they are engaged in organizational design, a process that involves decisions about six elements: work specialization, chain of command, span of control, centralization and decentralization, formalization, (Fundamentals of Management, Stephen Pfeffer, 2019, Pearson Education, Inc.)

--- [Page 6] ---
Page 6 of 54
Ord. No. 0866-22
Update
To make something more modern or suitable for use now by adding new information or changing its design; A new form of something that existed at an earlier time (Cambridge Dictionary)
R.A. 10121
Republic Act No. 10121 An Act Strengthening the Philippine Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Framework and Institutionalizing the National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Plan, Appropriating Funds Thereof and for Other Purposes
IRR
Implementing Rules and Regulations
SG
Salary Grade
NGO
Non-Government Organization
DRRM
Disaster Risk Reduction and Management
NDRRMC
National Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council
BDRRMC
Barangay Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Committee
CDRRMO
City Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Office
LDRRMO
Local Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Office
LDRRMP
Local Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Plan
LDRRMC
Local Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council
LDC
Local Development Council
LDRRMF
Local Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Fund
LGU
Local Government Unit
CSO
Rule 2 Section 1.D defines CSOs as Civil Society Organizations - non-state actors whose aims are neither to generate profits nor seek governing power. CSOs unite people to advance shared goals and interests. They have a presence in public life, expressing interests and values of their members or others, and are based on social, ethical, cultural, scientific, religious or philanthropic and other considerations. CSOs include Non-Government Organizations (NGOs), professional associations, foundations, independent research institutes, Community-Based Organizations (CBOs), faith-based organizations, people's organizations, social movements, and labor unions.
ACDVC
Accredited Community Disaster Volunteers
OCD
Office of Civil Defense
DILG
Department of the Interior and Local Government
DBM
Department of Budget and Management
CSC
Civil Service Commission
CMO
City Mayor's Office
QRF
Quick Response Fund - These are built-in budgetary allocations that represent pre-disaster or standby funds for agencies in order to immediately assist areas struck by catastrophes and crises. (Department of Budget and Management)

--- [Page 7] ---
Page 7 of 54
Ord. No. 0866-22

Adaptation
The adjustment in natural or human systems in response to actual or expected climatic stimuli or their effects, which moderates harm or exploits beneficial opportunities (Section 3.a of RA 10121)

Capacity
A combination of all strengths and resources available within a community, organization, or region that mitigates the impacts of risk or effects of a disaster. Capacity may include infrastructure and physical means, institutions, societal coping abilities, as well as human knowledge, skills, and collective attributes such as social relationships, leadership, and management. Capacity may also be described as capability (Section 3.b of RA 10121)

Climate Change
A change in climate that can be identified by changes in the mean and/or variability of its properties and that persists for an extended period typically longer than typical variations in natural variability or as a result of human activity (Section 3.d of RA 10121)

CBDRRM
"Community-Based Disaster Risk Reduction and Management" — a process of disaster risk reduction and management in which at-risk communities are actively engaged in the identification, analysis, treatment, monitoring, and evaluation of disaster risks in order to reduce their vulnerabilities and enhance their capacities, and where the people are at the heart of decision-making and implementation of disaster risk reduction and management activities (Section 3.e of RA 10121)

Complex Emergency
A form of human-induced emergency in which the cause of the emergency as well as the assistance to the affected is complicated by intense level of political considerations (Section 3.f of RA 10121)

Contingency Planning
A management process that analyzes specific potential events or emerging situations that might threaten society or the environment and establishes arrangements in advance to enable timely, effective and appropriate responses to such events and situations (Section 3.g of RA 10121)

Disaster
A serious disruption of the functioning of a community or a society involving widespread human, material, economic, environmental losses and impacts, which exceeds the ability of the affected community or society to cope using its own resources. Disasters are often described as a result of the combination of: the exposure to a hazard; consequences of the hazard; insufficient capacity or measures to reduce or cope with the potential negative consequences. Disaster impacts may include loss of life, injury, disease and other negative effects on human, physical, mental and social well-being, together with damage to property, destruction of assets, loss of services, social and economic disruption and environmental degradation.

Disaster Mitigation
The lessening or limitation of the adverse impacts of hazards and related disasters. Mitigation measures encompass engineering techniques and hazard-resistant construction as well as improved environmental policies and public awareness. (Section 3.i of RA 10121)

--- [Page 8] ---
**Page 8 of 54**

**Ord. No. 0866-22**

---

**Disaster Preparedness**

The knowledge and capacities developed by governments, professional response and recovery organizations, communities, and individuals to effectively anticipate, respond to, and recover from the impacts of likely, imminent, or current hazard events or conditions. Preparedness action is carried out within the context of disaster risk reduction and management and aims to build the capacities needed to efficiently manage all types of emergencies and achieve orderly transitions from response to sustained recovery. Preparedness is based on a sound analysis of disaster risk and good linkages with early warning systems, and includes such activities as contingency planning, emergency operations plans, and the development of arrangements for coordination, evacuation, and public information, and associated training and field exercises. These must be supported by formal institutional, legal, and budgetary capacities. (Section 3.j of RA 10121)

---

**Disaster Prevention**

The outright avoidance of adverse impacts of hazards and related disasters. It expresses the concept and intention to completely avoid potential adverse impacts through action taken in advance such as construction of dams or embankments that eliminate flood risks, land-use regulations that do not permit any settlement in high risk zones, and seismic engineering designs that ensure the survival and function of a critical building in any likely earthquake. (Section 3.k of RA 10121)

---

**Disaster Response**

The provision of emergency services and public assistance during or immediately after a disaster in order to save lives, reduce health impacts, ensure public safety, and meet the basic subsistence needs of the people affected. Disaster response is predominantly focused on immediate and short-term needs and is sometimes called "disaster relief." (Section 3.l of RA 10121)

---

**Disaster Risk**

The potential disaster losses in lives, health status, livelihood, assets, and services, which could occur to a particular community or society over some specified future time period. (Section 3.m of RA 10121)

---

**Disaster Risk Reduction**

The concept and practice of reducing disaster risks through systematic efforts to analyze and manage the causal factors of disasters, including through reduced exposures to hazards, lessened vulnerability of people and property, wise management of land and the environment, and improved preparedness for adverse events. (Section 3.n of RA 10121)

---

**Disaster Risk Reduction and Management**

This refers to the use of administrative directives, organizations, and operational skills and capacities to implement strategies, policies, and improved coping capacities in order to lessen the adverse impacts of hazards and the possibility of disaster. Prospective disaster risk reduction and management refers to risk reduction and management activities that address and seek to avoid the development of new or increased disaster risks, especially if risk reduction and management activities have been previously implemented. (Section 3.o of RA 10121)

---

**Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Information System**

A specialized database which contains, among others, information on disasters and their human material, economic and environmental impact, risk assessment and mapping and vulnerable groups. (Section 3.p of RA 10121)

--- [Page 9] ---
Page 9 of 54
Ord. No. 0866-22

Early Warning System
The set of capacities needed to generate and disseminate timely and meaningful warning information to enable individuals, communities, and organizations threatened by a hazard to prepare and to act appropriately and in sufficient time to reduce the possibility of harm or loss. A people-centered early warning system necessarily comprises four (4) key elements: knowledge of the risks; monitoring, analysis, and forecasting of the hazards; communication or dissemination of alerts and warnings; and local capabilities to respond to the hazards received. The expression "end-to-end warning system" is also used throughout this document that warning systems need to span all steps from hazard detection to community response. (Section 3.6 of RA 10121)

Emergency
Unforeseen or sudden occurrence, especially danger, demanding immediate action. (Section 3.7 of RA 10121)

Emergency Management
The organization and management of resources and responsibilities for addressing all aspects of emergencies, in particular preparedness, response, and initial recovery steps. (Section 3.5 of RA 10121)

Exposure
The degree to which the elements at risk are likely to experience hazard events of different magnitudes. (Section 3.1 of RA 10121)

Geographic Information System
A database which contains, among others, geo-hazard assessments, information on climate change, and climate risk reduction and management. (Section 3.1 of RA 10121)

Hazard
A dangerous phenomenon, substance, human activity or condition that may cause loss of life, injury or other health impacts, property damage, economic disruption, or environmental damage. (Section 3.7 of RA 10121)

Land-Use Planning
The process undertaken by public authorities to identify, evaluate, and decide on different options for the use of land, including consideration of long-term economic, social and environmental objectives and the implications for different communities and interest groups, and the subsequent formulation and promulgation of plans that describe the permitted or acceptable uses. (Section 3.1 of RA 10121)

Mitigation
Structural and non-structural measures undertaken to limit the adverse impact of natural hazards, environmental degradation, and technological hazards and to ensure the ability of at-risk communities to address vulnerabilities aimed at minimizing the impact of disasters. Such measures include, but are not limited to, hazard-resistant construction and engineering works, the formulation of disaster plans, programs, and activities, awareness raising, knowledge management, policies on land-use and resource management, as well as the enforcement of comprehensive land-use planning, building and safety standards, and legislation. (Section 3.3 of RA 10121)

Post Disaster Recovery
The restoration and improvement where appropriate, of facilities, livelihood and living conditions of disaster-affected communities, including efforts to reduce disaster risk factors, in accordance with the principles of "build back better." (Section 3.4 of RA 10121)

--- [Page 10] ---
Page 10 of 54
Ord. No. 0866-22

Preparedness
Pre-disaster actions and measures undertaken within the context of disaster risk reduction and management and are based on sound risk analysis as well as pre-disaster activities to avert or minimize loss of life and property such as, but not limited to, community organizing, training, planning, equipping, stockpiling, hazard mapping, issuing of assets, information dissemination and education. This also includes the development/enhancement of an overall preparedness strategy, policy, institutional structure, warning and forecasting capabilities, and plans that define measures geared to help at-risk communities safeguard their lives and assets by being alert to hazards and taking appropriate action in the face of an imminent threat or actual disaster. (Section 3.b) of RA 10121)

Private Sector
The private sector is defined as the economy where the central social concern and process are the mutually beneficial production and distribution of goods and services to meet the physical needs of human beings. The private sector comprises private corporations, households and nonprofit institutions serving households. (Section 3.cc of RA 10121)

Public Sector Employees
All persons in the civil service. (Section 3.dd of RA 10121)

Rehabilitation
Measures that ensure the ability of affected communities/areas to restore their normal level of functioning by rebuilding livelihood and damaged infrastructures and increasing the communities' organizational capacity. (Section 3.ee of RA 10121)

Resilience
The ability of a system, community or society exposed to hazards to resist, absorb, accommodate and recover from the effects of a hazard in a timely and efficient manner, including through the preservation and restoration of essential basic structures and functions. (Section 3.ff of RA 10121)

Response
Any concerted effort by two (2) or more agencies, public or private, to provide assistance or intervention during or immediately after a disaster to meet the life preservation and basic substance needs of those people affected and in the restoration of essential public activities and facilities. (Section 3.gg of RA 10121)

Risk
The combination of the probability of an event and its negative consequences. (Section 3.hh of RA 10121)

Risk Assessment
Analysis of the potential impact and extent of risk by analyzing potential hazards and evaluating existing conditions of vulnerability that together could potentially harm exposed people, property, services, livelihood and the environment on which they depend. Risk assessments with associated risk planning include: a review of the technical characteristics of hazards such as their location, intensity, frequency and probability; the analysis of exposure vulnerability; the assessment of health, socio-economic and environmental dimensions; and the evaluation of the effectiveness of prevailing and alternative coping capacities in respect to likely risk scenarios. (Section 3.jj of RA 10121)

--- [Page 11] ---
Page 11 of 54
Ord. No. 0866-22

Risk Management
The systematic approach and practice of managing uncertainty to minimize potential harm and loss. It comprises risk assessment and analysis, and the implementation of strategies and specific actions to control, reduce and transfer risks. It is widely practiced by organizations to minimize risk in investment decisions and to address operational risks such as those of business disruption, production failure, environmental damage, social impacts and damage from fire and natural disasters (Section 3.1k of RA 10121).

Risk Transfer
The process of formally or informally shifting the financial consequences of particular risks from one party to another whereby a household, community, enterprise or state authority will obtain resources from the other party after a disaster occurs, is exchange for ongoing or compensatory social or financial benefits provided to that other party. Section 3.1k of RA 10121.

State of Calamity
A condition involving major causal and/or major damages to property, destruction of livelihoods, roads and normal way of life of people in the affected areas as a result of the occurrence of natural or human-induced hazard. (Section 3.1a of RA 10121)

Sustainable Development
Development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. It contains within it two (2) key concepts: (1) the concept of "needs", in particular, the essential needs of the world's poor, to which attention must be given; and (2) the concept of sustainability, limitations imposed by the state of technology and social organizations on the environment's ability to meet present and future needs. It is the harmonious integration of a sound and viable economy, responsible governance, social cohesion, harmony, and ecological integrity to ensure that human development now and through future generations is a life-enhancing process. (Section 3.1m of RA 10121)

Vulnerability
The characteristics and circumstances of a community, system or asset that make it susceptible to the damaging effects of a hazard. Vulnerability may arise from various physical, social, economic, and environmental factors such as poor design and construction of buildings, inadequate protection of assets, lack of public information and awareness, limited official recognition of risks and preparedness measures, and disregard for wise environmental management. (Section 3.1n of RA 10121)

Vulnerable and marginalized groups
Those that face higher exposure to disaster risk and poverty including, but not limited to, women, children, elderly, differently-abled people, and ethnic minorities. (Section 3.0e of RA 10121)

R.A. 1080
Republic Act 1080 - An Act Declaring the BAR and Board examinations as Civil Service Examinations

Central 911
The Central Communications and Emergency Response Center was established on September 27, 2002 to provide a centralized and integrated system that links the government's resources to the emergency needs of the constituents of Davao City

SECTION 4. CONVERSION OF THE CITY DISASTER RISK REDUCTION AND MANAGEMENT OFFICE (CDRRMO)
The City Risk Reduction and Management Office (CDRRMO) shall be converted from a Division under the City Mayor's Office to a regular department of the City Government of Davao pursuant to the Civil Service Commission's Omnibus Rules on Appointments and Other Human Resource Actions.

--- [Page 12] ---
Page 12 of 54
Ord. No. 0866-22
A. The City Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Office (CDRRMO), a division under the Office of the City Mayor, shall become a regular department of the City Government of Davao.
B. The CDRRMO shall be headed by a City Government Department Head II with Salary Grade 26.
C. The City Government Assistant Department Head II shall be the assistant Department Head with Salary Grade 24.
D. The CDRRMO shall be composed of five (5) divisions with the respective sections.
1. Administration and Training Division
a. Administrative Section
b. Training Section
2. Research and Planning Division
a. Research Section
b. Planning Section
3. Operations and Warning Division
a. Integrated Public Alert and Warning Section
b. Incident Assessment and Monitoring Section
4. Local Emergency Communications and Response Division (Central 911)
a. Emergency Communications Section
b. Emergency Response Section
5. Information and Communication Technology Division
a. Systems Section
b. Operations and Maintenance Section
E. The CDRRMO shall adhere to its vision and mission as a regular department;
1. The CDRRMO envisions a harmonious city that is resilient to natural and human-induced disasters, through proactive stances and efforts of the office, communities are empowered, strengthening collective disaster risk reduction and management capabilities.
2. The CDRRMO is geared towards leading the City in planning and coordinating disaster risk reduction and management efforts among agencies, barangays, and individuals. Education campaigns are also integral to the operations of the office, building capacities of communities and stakeholders in addressing disaster and climate change vulnerabilities. Efforts of the office are also cemented by institutionalizing policies, structures, coordinating mechanisms, building disaster-resilient communities in the city. The office is also driven to engage government institutions, civil society organizations, and the private sector in disaster risk reduction programs.

--- [Page 13] ---
Page 13 of 54
Ord. No. 0866-22

SECTION 5. DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS OF THE CITY DISASTER RISK REDUCTION AND MANAGEMENT OFFICE (CDRRMO) - The City Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Office (CDRRMO) shall perform the following functions with impartiality given the emerging challenges brought by disasters of our times and fulfilling Section 12(c) of Republic Act No. 10121:

A. Design, program, and coordinate disaster risk reduction and management activities consistent with the National Council's standards and guidelines;

B. Facilitate and support risk assessments and contingency planning activities at the local level;

C. Consolidate local disaster risk information which includes natural hazards, vulnerabilities, and climate change risks, and maintain a local risk map;

D. Organize and conduct training, orientation, and knowledge management activities on disaster risk reduction and management at the local level;

E. Operate a multi-hazard early warning system, linked to disaster risk reduction, to provide accurate and timely advice to national or local emergency response organizations and to the general public, through diverse mass media, particularly radio, landline communications, and technologies for communication within rural communities;

F. Formulate and implement a comprehensive integrated LDRRM in accordance with the national, regional, and provincial framework, and policies on disaster risk reduction in close coordination with the Local Development Councils (LDCs);

G. Prepare and submit to the local sanggunian through the LDRRMC and the LDC the annual CDRRMO Plan and budget, the proposed programming of the LDRRMF, other dedicated disaster risk reduction and management resources, and other regular funding sources and budgetary support of the CDRRMO/BRRCM;

H. Conduct continuous disaster monitoring and mobilize instrumentalities and entities of the LGUs, CSOs, private groups, and organized volunteers, to utilize their facilities and resources for the protection and preservation of life and properties during emergencies in accordance with existing policies and procedures;

I. Identify, assess, and manage the hazards, vulnerabilities, and risks that may occur in their locality;

J. Disseminate information and raise public awareness about those hazards, vulnerabilities and risks, their nature, effects, early warning signs and counter-measures;

K. Identify and implement cost-effective risk reduction measures/strategies;

L. Maintain a database of human resource, equipment, directories, and location of critical infrastructures and their capacities such as hospitals and evacuation centers;

--- [Page 14] ---
Page 14 of 54  
Ord. No. 0866-22  

M. Develop, strengthen and operationalize mechanisms for partnership or networking with the private sector, CSOs, and volunteer groups;  

N. Take all necessary steps on a continuing basis to maintain, provide, or arrange the provision of, or to otherwise make available, suitably trained and competent personnel for the effective civil defence and disaster risk reduction and management in its area;  

O. Organize, train, equip and supervise the local emergency response teams and the ACDEVs, ensuring that humanitarian aid workers are equipped with basic skills to assist mothers to breastfeed;  

P. Respond to and manage the adverse effects of emergencies and carry out recovery activities in the affected area, ensuring that there is an efficient mechanism for immediate delivery of food, shelter and medical supplies for women and children, endeavor to create a special place where internally-displaced mothers can find help with breastfeeding, feed and care for their babies and give support to each other;  

Q. Within its area, promote and raise public awareness of and compliance with this Ordinance and legislative provisions relevant to the purpose of this Ordinance and RA 10121;  

R. Serve as the secretariat and executive arm of the LDRRMC;  

S. Coordinate other disaster risk reduction and management activities;  

T. Establish linkage/network with other LGUs for disaster risk reduction and emergency response purposes;  

U. Recommend through the LDRRMC the enactment of local Ordinances consistent with the requirements of this Ordinance and RA 10121;  

V. Implement policies, approved plans and programs of the LDRRMC consistent with the requirements of this Ordinance and RA 10121;  

W. Establish a City Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Operations Center;  

X. Prepare and submit, through the LDRRMC and the LDC, the report on the utilization of the LDRRMF and any other dedicated disaster risk reduction and management resources to the Local Commission on Audit (COA), copy furnish the regional director of the OCD and the Local Government Operations Officer of the DILG; and  

Y. Act on other matters that may be authorized by the LDRRMC pursuant to the provisions of R.A. 10121.  

SECTION 6. ORGANIZATIONAL DIVISIONS AND RESPECTIVE FUNCTIONS OF THE CDRRMO - The structural organization of the CDRRMO shall be composed of five (5) divisions with their respective functions.

--- [Page 15] ---
Page 15 of 54
Ord. No. 0866-22
A. Administrative and Training Division
1. Plans, directs and coordinates functions regarding personnel administration, records management and other related administrative functions;
2. Formulates administrative policies to improve existing systems and procedures for effective and efficient delivery of services;
3. Oversees implementation of office policies and enforcement of appropriate sanctions;
4. Coordinates office activities and operations to secure efficiency and compliance to existing office policies;
5. Prepares and submits documents relative to the operation of the office such as, but not limited to annual accomplishment reports, annual procurement plan, project designs, development plans, and such other related documents as required by higher authorities, LFC, CPDO, COA, and other agencies;
6. Identifies, assesses and manages the hazards, vulnerabilities and risks that may occur in its locality;
7. Organizes and conducts training, orientation and knowledge management activities on Disaster Risk Reduction Management (DRRM) at the local level;
8. Disseminates information and raises public awareness about those hazards and vulnerabilities;
9. Takes all necessary steps on a continuing basis to maintain, provide or arrange the provision of, or to otherwise make available, suitably-trained and competent personnel for effective civil defense and DRRM in its area;
10. Organizes, trains, equips and supervises the local emergency response teams and the Accredited Community Disaster Volunteers (ACDV's) ensuring that humanitarian aid workers are equipped with basic skills to assist mothers to breastfeed;
11. Within its area, promotes and raises public awareness of, and compliance with RA 10121 and legislative provisions relevant to the purpose of the latter;
12. Implements policies, approves plans and programs of the LDRRMC consistent with the policies and guidelines laid down in RA 10121;
13. Trains the most vulnerable sectors (women, children, senior citizens and PWDs) in DRRM, especially in disaster preparedness;
14. Performs other functions consistent with the provisions of this Ordinance and that of R.A. 10121;

--- [Page 16] ---
Page 16 of 54  
Ord. No. 0866-22  

B. Operations and Warning Division  
1. Operates a multi-hazard early warning system, linked to Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR) to provide accurate and timely advice to national or local emergency response organizations and to the general public, through diverse mass media, particularly, landline communications, and technologies for communication within rural areas;  
2. Conducts continuous disaster monitoring and mobilizes instrumentalities and entities of the LGUs, CSOs, private groups, and organized volunteers, to utilize their facilities and resources for the protection and preservation of life and properties during emergencies in accordance with existing policies;  
3. Develops, strengthens, and operationalizes mechanisms for partnership or networking with the private sector, CSOs, and volunteer groups;  
4. Responds to and manages the adverse effects of emergencies and carry out recovery activities in the affected area, ensuring that there is an efficient mechanism for immediate delivery of food, shelter, and medical supplies for women and children, endeavors to create a special place where internally displaced persons can find help for breastfeeding, feed, and care for their babies, and give support to each;  
5. Coordinates other DRRM activities;  
6. Establishes linkage and/or network with other LGUs for DRR and emergency response;  
7. Establishes provincial, city or municipal, and barangay DRRM operations;  
8. Gives early warning to the most vulnerable sectors (women, children, senior citizens, and PWDs) to respond to their needs;  
9. Responds to and manages the adverse effects of emergency and carry out recovery activities to the most vulnerable areas especially to the vulnerable sectors (women, children, senior citizens, and PWDs);  
10. Performs other functions consistent with the provisions of this Ordinance and that of R.A. 10121;  

C. Research and Planning Division  
1. Designs, programs, and coordinates DRMM activities consistent with the NDRRMC's standards and guidelines;  
2. Facilitates and supports risk assessment and contingency planning activities at the local level;  
3. Consolidates local disaster risk information which includes natural hazards, vulnerabilities, and climate change risks and maintains a local risk map;

--- [Page 17] ---
Page 17 of 54
Ord. No. 0866-22

4. Conducts research and development initiatives on DRRM;
5. Formulates and implements a comprehensive and integrated Local DRRM Plan (LDRRMP) in accordance with the national, regional, and provincial framework and policies on DRR in close coordination with the Local Development Council (LDC);
6. Prepares and submits to the Local Sanggunian through the Local DRRM Council and the LDC, the annual LDRRMP and budget, the proposed programming of the LDRRMF, other dedicated DRRM resources, and other regular funding sources and budgetary support of the LDRRMC;
7. Maintains a database of human resource and their capacities, equipment, directories, and location of critical infrastructures such as hospitals and evacuation centers;
8. Serves as the Secretariat and executive arm of the LDRRMC;
9. Recommends through the LDRRMC the enactment of local ordinances consistent with R.A. 10121;
10. Prepares and submits, through the LDRRMC and the LDC, the report on the utilization of the LDRRMP and other dedicated DRRM resources to the local COA, copy furnished the regional director of the Office of Civil Defense (OCD) and the Local Government Operations Officer of the DILG;
11. Involves the most vulnerable sectors (women, children, senior citizens and PWDs) in risk assessment and planning;
12. Implements the accreditation of the Community Disaster Volunteers based on the guidelines set by the NDRRMC; and
13. Performs other functions consistent with the provisions of this Ordinance and that of R.A. 10121.

D. Local Emergency Communications and Response Division (Central 911)
1. Links government resources to the emergency needs to the best interests of the public;
2. Ensures the proper management and response to various day-to-day emergencies, including disasters and calamities. All rescue and response activities are also being guided by safety protocols and standard operating procedures and an on-scene management system adopted from the Incident Command System (ICS);
3. Continues to pursue strategies that aims to maximize its existing operational capacity through strategic planning and management;
4. Acquisition, maintenance and upgrade of emergency resources in order to proactively benefit the general public;

--- [Page 18] ---
Page 18 of 54  
Ord. No. 0866-22

5. Institutionalizes its programs and projects that will ensure improved efficiency and competency in terms of the delivery of emergency response services;

6. Initiates growth and development in terms of professionalizing the emergency management systems;

7. Performs other functions consistent with the provisions of this Ordinance and that of R.A. 10121;

E. Information and Communication Technology Division

1. Manages all information communication technology resources and primarily handles all systems updates, troubleshooting, and maintenance of IT equipment specially the Emergency Calls Answering Point and Dispatch (ECAPD) Unit;

2. Provides related support to all users of Information Communication Technology infrastructure;

3. Implements necessary electronic security measures to safeguard the database of the organization;

4. Ensures that proper archiving and purging procedures are being implemented;

5. Develops and evaluates new systems-related technology that may be beneficial to the operation of the office;

6. Maintains coordination and linkages to other units and agencies.

SECTION 7. CREATION OF CDRRMO PLANTILLA POSITIONS - Pursuant to Section 13 of Civil Service Memorandum Circular No. 13, Series of 1992, entitled "Guidelines and Standards in the Establishment of Organizational Structure and Staffing Pattern in the Local Government Units", and DBM's Index of Occupational Services, Occupational Groups, Classes and Salary Grades, the CDRRMO shall have the regular positions, salary grades and the respective numbers to be created.

A. Regular positions of Department Head and Assistant Department Head shall be created in the CDRRMO.

| Class/Position Title | SG | Number of Positions |
| --- | --- | --- |
| City Government Department Head II | 26 | 1 |
| City Government Assistant Department Head II | 24 | 1 |

--- [Page 19] ---
Page 19 of 54  
Ord. No. 0866-22  

B. The following regular positions, salary grades and the respective numbers shall be created under the Administrative and Training Division:  
| Class/Position Title | SG | Number of Positions |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Officer IV | 22 | 1 |
| Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Officer III | 18 | 1 |

1. Administrative Section  
| Class/Position Title | SG | Number of Positions |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Officer II | 15 | 1 |
| Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Officer I | 11 | 1 |
| Administrative Officer III (Supply Officer II) | 14 | 1 |
| Administrative Officer I (Supply Officer I) | 10 | 1 |
| Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Assistant | 8 | 1 |
| Administrative Aide VI (Clerk III) | 6 | 1 |
| Administrative Aide IV (Clerk II) | 4 | 1 |
| Administrative Aide IV (Driver II) | 4 | 1 |
| Administrative Aide IV (Reproduction Machine Operator II) | 4 | 1 |
| Security Guard I | 3 | 2 |
| Administrative Aide III (Utility Worker II) | 3 | 1 |

2. Training Section  
| Class/Position Title | SG | Number of Positions |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Officer II | 15 | 1 |
| Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Officer I | 11 | 1 |
| Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Assistant | 8 | 1 |

C. The following regular positions, salary grades and the respective numbers shall be created under the Research and Planning Division:  
| Class/Position Title | SG | Number of Positions |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Officer IV | 22 | 1 |
| Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Officer III | 18 | 2 |

1. Research Section:  
| Class/Position Title | SG | Number of Positions |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Officer II | 15 | 1 |
| Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Officer I | 11 | 2 |
| Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Assistant | 8 | 1 |

--- [Page 20] ---
2. Planning Section:

| Class/Position Title | SG | Number of Positions |
|----------------------|----|--------------------|
| Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Officer II | 15 | 2 |
| Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Officer I | 11 | 1 |
| Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Assistant | 8 | 1 |
| Project Evaluation Assistant | 8 | 1 |
| Administrative Aide VI (Clerk III) | 6 | 1 |
| Administrative Aide IV (Clerk II) | 4 | 1 |
| Administrative Aide IV (Driver II) | 4 | 1 |

D. The following regular positions, salary grades and the respective numbers shall be created under the Operations and Warning Division:

| Class/Position Title | SG | Number of Positions |
|----------------------|----|--------------------|
| Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Officer IV | 22 | 1 |
| Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Officer III | 18 | 1 |

1. Integrated Public Alert and Warning Section:

| Class/Position Title | SG | Number of Positions |
|----------------------|----|--------------------|
| Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Officer II | 15 | 1 |
| Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Officer I | 11 | 1 |
| Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Assistant | 8 | 1 |
| Administrative Aide VI (Communications Equipment Operator I) | 6 | 4 |
| Administrative Assistant VI (Data Entry Machine Operator I) | 6 | 1 |
| Administrative Aide VI (Clerk III) | 6 | 1 |
| Administrative Aide IV (Clerk II) | 4 | 1 |
| Administrative Aide IV (Driver II) | 4 | 1 |
| Administrative Aide III (Utility Worker II) | 3 | 1 |

2. Risk Assessment and Monitoring Section:

| Class/Position Title | SG | Number of Positions |
|----------------------|----|--------------------|
| Engineer II | 16 | 1 |
| Geologist II | 15 | 1 |
| Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Officer I | 11 | 1 |
| Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Assistant | 8 | 1 |

--- [Page 21] ---
Page 21 of 54
Ord. No. 0866-22

E. The following regular positions, salary grades and the respective numbers shall be created under the Local Emergency Communications and Response Division (Central 911):

| Class/Position Title | SG | Number of Positions |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Special Operations Officer IV | 22 | 1 |
| Special Operations Officer III | 18 | 1 |
| Administrative Aide IV (Driver II) (32 CU) | 4 | 1 |
| Security Guard I | 3 | 1 |
| Administrative Aide III (Utility Worker II) | 3 | 1 |

1. Emergency Communications Section:

| Class/Position Title | SG | Number of Positions |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Special Operations Officer II | 14 | 1 |
| Administrative Assistant V (Communications Equipment Operator IV) | 11 | 1 |
| Special Operations Officer I | 10 | 2 |
| Administrative Aide III (Communications Equipment Operator III) | 9 | 1 |
| Administrative Aide VI (Communications Equipment Operator II) | 6 | 2 |

2. Emergency Response Section:

| Class/Position Title | SG | Number of Positions |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Special Operations Officer II | 14 | 1 |
| Special Operations Officer I | 10 | 3 |
| Administrative Aide IV (Driver II) | 4 | 3 |

F. The following regular positions, salary grades and the respective numbers shall be created under the Information and Communication Technology Division:

| Class/Position Title | SG | Number of Positions |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Information Technology Officer I | 19 | 1 |

1. Systems Section

| Class/Position Title | SG | Number of Positions |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Information Systems Analyst II | 16 | 1 |
| Information Systems Analyst I | 12 | 1 |
| Computer Programmer I | 11 | 1 |
| Information Systems Researcher | 10 | 1 |

--- [Page 22] ---
2. Operations and Maintenance Section

| Class/Position Title | SG | Number of Positions |
|----------------------|----|--------------------|
| Computer Maintenance Technologist II | 15 | 1 |
| Computer Maintenance Technologist I | 11 | 1 |
| Administrative Assistant III (Computer Operator II) | 9 | 1 |
| Administrative Assistant II (Data Controller II) | 8 | 1 |
| Administrative Assistant II (Electronics and Communications Equipment Technician II) | 8 | 2 |

SECTION 8. FUNCTIONS AND QUALIFICATIONS OF PLANTILLA POSITIONS - Functions of the plantilla positions in the CDRRMO are hereby stated including the standard qualifications required by the Civil Service Commission (CSC). The Human Resource Management Office (HRMO) may require additional qualifications for each position relevant to the provisions of this Ordinance and that of R.A. 10121;

A. City Government Department Head II

1. Qualifications
a. Must be civil service eligible and must have a Civil Defense/DRM experience (Section 3 of the IRR for R.A. 10121);
b. Bachelor's degree;
c. Career service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility;
d. Five (5) years in a position involving management and supervision, one (1) year of which is relevant to DRM;
e. Thirty-two (32) hours of training in supervision and management on DRM.

2. Functions as stated in Section 4 of the Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) of R.A. 10121:
a. Establishes integrated institutional capacity within the City sphere to enable the effective implementation of disaster management policy and regulations;
b. Establishes a uniform approach to assessing and monitoring disaster risk that will inform disaster management planning and disaster risk reduction undertaken by organs of state and other role players;
c. Ensures all disaster management stakeholders develop and implement integrated disaster management plans and risk reduction programs in accordance with approved frameworks;
d. Ensures effective and appropriate disaster response and recovery;
e. Promotes awareness of risks among stakeholders by capacitating all role players through integrated education, training, and public awareness supported by scientific research;

--- [Page 23] ---
Page 23 of 54  
Ord. No. 0866-22  

f. Improves performance management processes in line with strategic objectives of the City;  
g. Performs such other duties and functions as may be prescribed by law, Ordinance, or as may be directed by any superior officers.  

B. Assistant City Government Department Head  

1. Qualifications  
a. Bachelor's degree;  
b. Four (4) years in a position involving management and supervision, one (1) year of which is relevant to DRRM;  
c. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility;  
d. Twenty-four (24) hours of training in supervision and management on DRRM.  

2. Functions  
a. Assists the City Government Department Head II in the performance of his/her duties and responsibilities and in running the operations of the office;  
b. Assists the City Government Department Head II in the management and giving direction(s) on the planning, implementation and evaluation of programs and projects of the office;  
c. Supervises various operational activities in the office and assumes the duties and functions of the City Government Department Head II in case of absence and/or incapacity;  
d. Performs such other duties and functions as may be prescribed by law, ordinance, or as may be directed by the City Government Department Head II and/or any superior officers.  

C. Regular Positions under Administration and Training Division  
1. Local Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Officer IV SG-22  

Qualifications:  
a. Bachelor's degree;  
b. Three (3) years of relevant experience on DRRM;  
c. Sixteen (16) hours of relevant training on DRRM;  
d. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.  

Functions:  
a. Under direction, formulates and develops plans, programs, projects and strategies relative to DRRM;  
b. Identifies and implements cost-effective risk reduction measures and strategies;  
c. Directs and supervises the implementation of policies, programs, projects and activities of the division and evaluates their results for future appropriate actions;

--- [Page 24] ---
Page 24 of 54
Ord. No. 0866-22

d. Within its area, promote and raise public awareness regarding hazards, risks, and vulnerabilities;
e. Performs such other related functions that may, from time to time, be assigned by the immediate supervisor.

2. Local Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Officer III SG-18

Qualifications:
a. Bachelor's degree;
b. Two (2) years of relevant experience on DRRM;
c. Eight (8) hours of relevant training on DRRM;
d. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.

Functions:
a. Assists the Division Chief in monitoring and coordinating the records & correspondence management such as document tracing, records filing, storage, and maintenance for safekeeping and future reference;
b. Assists the Division Chief in monitoring and coordinating the property & supply management such as supply utilization, property/equipment maintenance to give or service from requests for purchase of materials and other equipment repairs;
c. Participates in the planning and preparation of budget, monitoring, and fund control to ensure the smooth flow of the financial operations of the office;
d. Assists in planning, supervising, and coordinating matters involving personnel administration for efficient and effective operation and submit proposals for approval of policies and guidelines on personnel administration and development and the improvement and maintenance of employee relations;
e. Assists in providing administrative support and general services to provide assistance for office repairs and utility work;
f. Performs other functions as may be directed by the Department Head.

3. Administrative Section

a. Local Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Officer II SG-15

Qualifications:
a. Bachelor's degree;
b. One (1) year of relevant experience on DRRM;
c. Four (4) hours of relevant training on DRRM;
d. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.

Functions:
a. Assists in administration of accounting and financial management;
b. Reviews, revises and/or concurs with purchase request, orders, and other procurement, correspondence/documentations prior to submission to the GSO, monitor and track status of requisitions and payables;

--- [Page 25] ---
Page 25 of 54  
Ord. No. 0866-22  

c. Oversees the preparation of financial report, draft annual budget and procurement plan;  
d. Performs staff functions and other related duties that may from time to time be assigned.  

b. Local Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Officer I SG-11  

Qualifications:  
a. Bachelor's degree;  
b. No experience required;  
c. No training required;  
d. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.  

Functions:  
a. Drafts policies and guidelines on personnel administration and development plan;  
b. Assists in monitoring of the personnel's attendance, leave, performance, behavior, and other daily whereabouts; Extracts DTR and Prepares Monthly Record of Attendance;  
c. Mediates personnel administrative problems by coordinating, preparation of incident reports and analyzing data;  
d. Coordinates with HRMO in personnel development activities; Maintenance and update database;  
e. Perform such other functions as may be assigned from time to time  

c. Administrative Officer III (Supply Officer II) SG-14  

Qualifications:  
e. Bachelor's degree;  
f. One (1) year of relevant experience on DRRM;  
g. Four (4) hours of relevant training on DRRM;  
h. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.  

Functions:  
f. Undertakes and records the issuance of requested supplies and materials after the requisition have been approved by the supervisors concerned and submit periodic reports of the issuances made for monitoring of its utilization/supplies;  
g. Prepares and Submits Purchase Requests (PRs) and Purchase Orders (POs) and coordinate the process of delivery and distribution;  
h. Checks/extracts supplies and materials that have been delivered and kept/and maintain records of its delivery;  
i. Undertakes the inventory of supplies, maintain storage areas and recommend replenishment of supplies when quantity appears low; Prepares reports on disposal of damaged items or units;  
j. Performs other functions as may be directed by the Department Head.

--- [Page 26] ---
Page 26 of 54  
Ord. No. 0866-22  

d. Administrative Officer I (Supply Officer I) SG-10  
Qualifications:  
a. Bachelor's degree;  
b. No experience required;  
c. No training required;  
d. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.  

Functions:  
a. Undertakes the issuance of requested supplies and materials after the requisitions have been approved by the supervisors concerned and submits periodic reports of the issuances made for monitoring of its utilization/supplies;  
b. Checks/inspects supplies and materials that have been delivered and kept/and maintains records of its delivery;  
c. Does other functions as may be directed by the Department Head.  

e. Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Assistant SG-8  
Qualifications:  
a. Completion of two (2) years in college;  
b. One (1) year of relevant experience in DRRM;  
c. Four (4) hours of relevant training in DRRM;  
d. Career Service (Sub-Professional) First Level Eligibility.  

Functions:  
a. Coordinates administrative requirements of the activities, programs and projects of the Office; Prepares and handles correspondence;  
b. Assists the Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Officers in the gathering, collection and encoding of data related to DRRM;  
c. Manages agenda, meeting arrangements and appointments, etc.;  
d. Supports accounting and bookkeeping procedures;  
e. Performs other functions as may be directed by the supervisor.  

f. Administrative Aide VI (Clerk III) SG-6  
Qualifications:  
a. Completion of two (2) years in college;  
b. Four (4) hours of training in records management, data management, and/or office productivity tools;  
c. Six (6) months of experience in records management, data management, and/or office productivity tools;  
d. Career Service (Sub-Professional) First Level Eligibility.  

Functions:  
a. Serves as the incoming and outgoing document clerk;  
b. Performs document management, filing, scanning, data entry to DTSs;  
c. Performs other administrative and clerical tasks as assigned by the supervisor.

--- [Page 27] ---
Page 27 of 54  
Ord. No. 0866-22

d. Renders duty support during Disaster Response Operations;  
e. Performs other tasks that may be assigned by the supervisor.

g. Administrative Aide IV (Clerk II) SG-4

Qualifications:  
a. Completion of two (2) years in college;  
b. Training not required;  
c. Experience not required;  
d. Career Service (Sub-Professional) First Level Eligibility.

Functions:  
a. Receives, records, and releases applications for marriage, registration of births including registration of death and other miscellaneous documents for registration;  
b. Undertakes the typing/encoding activities of the district;  
c. Does other related functions as may be directed by the Department Head.

h. Administrative Aide IV (Driver II) SG-4

Qualifications:  
a. Elementary School Graduate;  
b. Training not required;  
c. Experience not required;  
d. Professional Driver's License (MC 10, s. 2013 - Cat IV).

Functions:  
a. Safely and efficiently transport personnel, office supplies and equipment using the office vehicle;  
b. Undertakes the proper maintenance and care of the vehicles to ascertain that the said vehicles are in good running condition;  
c. Prepares reports on fuel and oil consumption as well as the distance travelled for submission to the City Accountant's Office and City General Services Office;  
d. Accomplishes trip tickets by using the Daily Authorized Trips Summary to ensure that the trips are recorded and official;  
e. Does other related functions as may be directed by the Department Head.

i. Administrative Aide IV (Reproduction Machine Operator II) SG-4

Qualifications:  
a. Elementary School Graduate;  
b. Training not required;  
c. Experience not required;  
d. Civil Service Eligibility not required (MC 10, s. 2013 - Cat III).

--- [Page 28] ---
Page 28 of 54  
Ord. No. 0866-22  

Functions:  
a. Reproduces correspondence/reports and other pertinent documents related to personnel management to facilitate distribution and information dissemination to concerned personnel and offices of the Agency;  
b. Maintains the digital duplicator machine and photocopier by conducting regular checking to determine mechanical efficiency (or defects);  
c. Segments and sorts out the general forms for quick and easy identification and usage;  
d. Coordinates with the Administrative Officer should the equipment require supplies, repairs and services to ensure regular functionality and operability;  
e. Does other related functions as may be directed by the Department Head.  

J. Security Guard I SG-3  
Qualifications:  
a. High School Graduate;  
b. Four (4) hours of relevant training;  
c. One (1) year of relevant experience; and  
d. Security Guard License (MC 10, s. 2013 - Cat III)  

Functions:  
a. Assist in monitoring the Security Guard II in the performance of giving safety and security to city government client, employees and buildings/properties on their area of assignments to ensure implementation of security measures adopted by the office and keep records of incidents submitted;  
b. Assist in monitoring and observing individuals for any suspicious acts and apprehend the same for questioning when necessary to ensure adequate protection and safety of government properties and its immediate surroundings;  
c. Maintain peace and order in the government premises and apprehend violators of existing rules, regulations and ordinances; and  
d. Does other functions as may be directed by the Department Head.  

k. Administrative Aide III (Utility Worker II) SG-3  
Qualifications:  
a. Must be able to read and write;  
b. Training not required;  
c. Experience not required; and  
d. No Civil Service Eligibility Required (MC 10, s. 2013 - Cat IV)

--- [Page 29] ---
Page 29 of 54
Ord. No. 0866-22

Functions:
a. Maintains the cleanliness and sanitation of the office by cleaning the furniture and office equipment, throwing of waste and garbage; mopping the floor; and washing of dishes and other utensils used in the office in order to have a conducive, presentable, safe and healthy working environment;
b. Stores various housekeeping supplies for proper utilization and control;
c. Arranges office decorations in connection with the observance of various public holidays and other celebrations;
d. Locks and unlocks the padlocks of the office to ensure its safety and security;
e. Does other related functions as may be directed by the Department Head.

4. Training Section
a. Local Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Officer II SG-15
Qualifications:
a. Bachelor's degree;
b. One (1) year of relevant experience on DRRM;
c. Four (4) hours of relevant training on DRRM;
d. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.

Functions:
a. Acts as the Training Instructor and assist the CDRMO III in organizing and conducting trainings, orientation, and knowledge management activities on disaster risk reduction and management at the local level;
b. Assists in the conduct of drills and exercises;
c. Drafts instructional manual, materials needed and other relevant documents; Coordinates external training;
d. Performs staff functions and other related duties that may from time to time be assigned by the superior.

b. Local Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Officer I SG-11
Qualifications:
a. Bachelor's degree;
b. No experience required;
c. No training required;
d. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.

Functions:
a. Assists all the other CDRMOs in the organization and conduct of trainings, drills and exercises for the emergency response teams in the local and community level;
b. Conducts training review and evaluation;
c. Assists in the review and evaluation of proposed LDRRM programs, projects, activities in capacity enhancement;
d. Performs related functions that may, from time to time, be assigned by the immediate supervisor.

--- [Page 30] ---
Page 30 of 54  
Ord. No. 0866-22  
C. Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Assistant SG-8  
Qualifications:  
a. Completion of two (2) years in college;  
b. One (1) year of relevant experience on DRRM;  
c. Four (4) hours of relevant training on DRRM;  
d. Career Service (Sub-professional) First Level Eligibility.  

Functions:  
a. Assists all the other Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Officers in coordinating and updating of trainings and drill schedules;  
b. Assists the Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Officer in conducting training review and evaluation;  
c. Prepares training materials;  
d. Maintains appropriate files, reports, documentation and data;  
e. Performs related functions that may, from time to time, be assigned by the immediate supervisor.  

D. Regular Positions under the Research and Planning Division  
1. Local Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Officer IV SG-22  
Qualifications:  
a. Bachelor's degree;  
b. Three (3) years of relevant experience on DRRM;  
c. Sixteen (16) hours of relevant training on DRRM;  
d. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.  

Functions:  
a. Under direction, formulates and develops plans, programs, projects and strategies relative to DRRM;  
b. Consolidates local disaster risk information which includes natural hazards, vulnerabilities and climate change risks and maintain a local risk map;  
c. Directs and supervises the implementation of policies, programs, projects and activities of the division and evaluates their results for future appropriate actions;  
d. Establishes and maintains Information/data bank related to occurrence of disaster or emergency;  
e. Acts on other matters that may be authorized.  

2. Local Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Officer III SG-18  
Qualifications:  
a. Bachelor's degree;  
b. Two (2) years of relevant experience on DRRM;  
c. Eight (8) hours of relevant training on DRRM;  
d. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.  

Functions:  
a. Assists the Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Officer in designing and formulating a comprehensive and integrated Local DRRM Plan and programs in accordance with the national, regional and provincial framework & policies on DRR in close coordination with the Local Development Council (LDC);

--- [Page 31] ---
Page 31 of 54
Ord. No. 0866-22

b. Assists the Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Officer in the preparation of the annual DRRM Plan and Budget, the proposed programming of the LDRRM Plan and other dedicated DRRM resources;
c. Facilitates communication through the LDRRMC and the LDC report on the utilization of the LDRRM Plan and other dedicated DRRM Resources to the Local COA and other concerned agencies;
d. Acts as the Secretariat and the executive arm of the Local DRRM Council (LDRRMC);
e. Performs such other related functions that may, from time to time, be assigned by the immediate chief.

3. Research Section

a. Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Officer II SG-15

Qualifications:
a. Bachelor's degree;
b. One (1) year of relevant experience on DRRM;
c. Four (4) hours of relevant training on DRRM;
d. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.

Functions:
a. Supervises and coordinates work plans in collecting and gathering of data relative to risks, hazards and vulnerabilities;
b. Contributes technical inputs to the existing and development of research projects;
c. Liaises on a regular basis with planning section or CPDO on work plans and strategic planning;
d. Drafts reports, papers and report;
e. Performs such other related functions that may, from time to time, be assigned by the immediate chief.

b. Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Officer I SG-11

Qualifications:
a. Bachelor's degree;
b. No experience required;
c. No training required;
d. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.

Functions:
a. Collects/obtains data relative to risks, hazards and vulnerabilities of barangays;
b. Coordinates with line agencies in the planning, management, monitoring and evaluation of activities relative to DRRM;
c. Follows-up administrative requirements of the activities, programs and projects of the Office;
d. Assists the latter Local Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Officer in the formulation and development of the operational office guidelines and policies;
e. Performs such other related functions that may, from time to time, be assigned by the immediate chief.

--- [Page 32] ---
Page 32 of 54  
Ord. No. 0866-22  
c. Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Assistant SG-8  
Qualifications:  
a. Completion of two (2) years in college;  
b. One (1) year of relevant experience on DRRM;  
c. Four (4) hours of relevant training on DRRM;  
d. Career Service (Sub-professional) First Level Eligibility.  

Functions:  
a. Assists the CDRMOs in the gathering and collection of data related to DRRM;  
b. Follows-up administrative requirements of the activities, programs and projects of the Office;  
c. Performs staff functions and other related duties that may be assigned by superiors.  

4. Planning Section  
a. Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Officer II SG-15  
Qualifications:  
a. Bachelor's degree;  
b. One (1) year of relevant experience on DRRM;  
c. Four (4) hours of relevant training on DRRM;  
d. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.  

Functions:  
a. Maintains a local risk and hazard map and database on human resource and their capabilities, equipment, directories and location of critical infrastructures such as hospitals and evacuation centers;  
b. Conducts research and development initiatives on DRRM;  
c. Consolidates local disaster risk information which includes natural and man-made or human-induced hazards, vulnerability assessments and damage risks;  
d. Facilitates and support risk assessments and contingency planning activities at the local level;  
e. Performs such other related functions that may, from time to time, be assigned by the immediate chief.  

b. Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Officer I SG-11  
Qualifications:  
a. Bachelor's degree;  
b. No experience required;  
c. No training required;  
d. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.  

Functions:  
a. Assists the Local Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Officers in maintaining the local risk and hazard map and database on human resource and their capabilities, equipment, directories and location of critical infrastructures such as hospitals and evacuation centers;  
b. Conducts risk assessments for a diverse range of sites, such as chemical factories, nuclear factories, city centers and major sporting venues;

--- [Page 33] ---
Page 33 of 54
Ord. No. 0866-22

c. Analyzes and drafts plan for potential risks, such as outbreaks of infections or disease, technical failure of electricity networks, major gas leaks and severe weather conditions;
d. Prepares project proposals to support DRRM activities;
e. Performs such other related functions that may, from time to time, be assigned by the immediate chief.

C. Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Assistant SG-8

Qualifications:
a. Completion of two (2) years in college;
b. One (1) year of relevant experience with DRRM;
c. Four (4) hours of relevant training on DRRM;
d. Career Service (Sub-professional) First Level Eligibility.

Functions:
a. Assists the Local Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Officers in the gathering and collection of data related to DRRM;
b. Follow-up administrative requirements of the activities, programs and projects of the Office;
c. Performs staff functions and other related duties that may be assigned by superiors.

d. Project Evaluation Assistant SG-8

Qualifications:
a. Completion of two (2) years in college;
b. One (1) year of relevant experience;
c. Four (4) hours of relevant training;
d. Career Service (Sub-professional) First Level Eligibility.

Functions:
a. Assists the other Project Development Officer I in undertaking research and prepare proposed program designs in the formulation and development of LDRRM Fund Investment Plans;
b. Conducts and initiate community assessment and strategy for disaster risk reduction;
c. Assists in data banking of disaster risk reduction;
d. Performs staff functions and other related duties that may, from time to time, be assigned as may be assigned by the superior.

e. Administrative Assistant VI (Clerk III) SG-8

Qualifications:
a. Completion of two (2) years in college or High School graduate with relevant vocational/trade course;
b. Experience not required;
c. Training not required;
d. Communications Equipment Operator (MC 10, s. 2010 - Cat. II).

Functions:
a. Serves as the incoming and outgoing document clerk;

--- [Page 34] ---
Page 34 of 54
Ord. No. 0866-22

b. Performs document management, filing, scanning, data entry to DTS;
c. Performs other administrative and clerical tasks as assigned by the supervisor;
d. Renders duty support during Disaster Response Operations;
e. Performs other tasks that may be assigned by the supervisor.

f. Administrative Assistant IV (Clerk II) SG-4

Qualifications:
a. Completion of two (2) years in college;
b. Experience not required;
c. Training not required;
d. Career Service (Sub-professional) First Level Eligibility.

Functions:
a. Assists along administration works in the preparation of physical and financial reports;
b. Reviews, records outgoing disbursement vouchers/payrolls;
c. Types/encodes communications, transmittals, disbursement vouchers and financial reports;
d. Prepares acknowledgement receipts for collections and deposit;
e. Files and stores copies and memorandum, guidelines and other reference documents of the Division to safe keep pertinent documents and ensure that these can be easily retrieved when needed;
f. Maintains and updates database of office records to ensure that there is an inventory of available sources/documents that can be used as references for staff;
g. Performs other tasks assigned by the supervisor.

g. Administrative Aide IV (Driver II) SG-4

Qualifications:
a. Elementary School Graduate;
b. Training not required;
c. Experience not required;
e. Professional Driver's License (MC 10, s. 2013 - Cat IV).

Functions:
a. Safely and efficiently transport personnel, office supplies and equipment using the office vehicle;
b. Undertakes the proper maintenance and care of the vehicles to ascertain that the said vehicles are in good running condition;
c. Prepares reports on fuel and oil consumption as well as the distance traveled for submission to the City Accountant's Office and City General Services Office;
d. Accomplishes trip tickets by using the Daily Authorized Trips Summary to ensure that the trips are recorded and official;
e. Does other related functions as may be directed by the department head.

--- [Page 35] ---
Page 35 of 54
Ord. No. 0866-22
E. Regular Positions under the Operations and Warning Division
1. Local Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Officer IV SG-22
Qualifications:
a. Bachelor's degree;
b. Three (3) years of relevant experience on DRRM;
c. Sixteen (16) Hours of relevant training on DRRM;
d. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.
Functions:
a. Under direction, formulate and develop plans, programs, projects and strategies relative to DRRM
b. Supervises the response to manage the adverse effects of emergencies and carry out recovery activities in the affected areas
c. Directs and supervises the implementation of policies, programs, projects and activities of the division and evaluates their results for future appropriate actions
d. Operates as the LDRRM Officer at the local level;
e. Performs such other related functions that may, from time to time, be assigned by the immediate chief.
2. Local Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Officer III SG-18
Qualifications:
a. Bachelor's degree;
b. Two (2) years of relevant experience on DRRM;
c. Eight (8) hours of relevant training on DRRM;
d. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.
Functions:
a. Assists the LDRRM Officer in the conduct of operations during emergencies;
b. Establishes appropriate monitoring stations and warning/dissemination capabilities to make the general public aware of impending disasters and emergencies; Oversees the operation of a multi-hazard warning system to provide accurate/ timely advice to all emergency response organizations and the public through any way of diverse media, particularly radio, landline communication, and other technology; Maintains/Updates data bank on all info-risks & hazards, available resources, DANA, etc.;
c. Mobilizes instrumentalities of the local unit, private groups and organized volunteers to utilize their resources and facilities for the protection & preservation of life and properties during emergencies in accordance with existing policies & procedures;
d. Conducts Damage and Needs Analysis (DANA) in the affected area/s and prepare and submit the same to concerned authorities and agencies;
e. Performs other tasks that may be assigned by the immediate supervisor.

--- [Page 36] ---
Page 36 of 54
Ord. No. 0866-22

3. Integrated Public Alert and Warning Section
a. Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Officer II SG-15

Qualifications:
a. Bachelor's degree;
b. One (1) year of relevant experience on DRRM;
c. Four (4) hours of relevant training on DRRM;
d. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.

Functions:
a. Develops, strengthens, and operationalizes mechanisms for partnership or networking with the private sector, CSOs, and other volunteer groups;
b. Conducts Risk and Damage and Needs Analysis (RDANA) in the affected areas and carry out recovery activities to the most vulnerable areas;
c. Assists the LRRMOs in the conduct of operations during emergencies;
d. Performs other tasks as may be assigned by the supervisors.

b. Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Officer I SG-11

Qualifications:
a. Bachelor's degree;
b. No experience required;
c. No training required;
d. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.

Functions:
a. Leads in the profiling and mapping the hazards of the barangays by collecting and gathering data;
b. Establishes linkage and/or network with other LGUs for DRR and emergency response purposes;
c. Coordinates other DRRM activities;
d. Performs other tasks as may be assigned by the supervisor.

c. Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Assistant I SG-8

Qualifications:
a. Completion of two (2) years in college;
b. One (1) year of relevant experience on DRRM;
c. Four (4) hours of relevant training on DRRM;
d. Career Service (Sub-professional) First Level Eligibility.

Functions:
a. Assists the CDRMOs in the gathering and collection of data related to DRRM;
b. Follow-up administrative requirements of the activities, programs and projects of the Office;
c. Performs staff functions and other related duties that may be assigned by superiors.

--- [Page 37] ---
Page 37 of 54
Ord. No. 0866-22
d. Administrative Aide VI (Communications Equipment Operator II) SG-6
Qualifications:
a. Completion of two (2) years in college or High School graduate with relevant vocational/trade course;
b. Experience not required;
c. Training not required; and
d. Communication Equipment Operator (MC 10 s.2013 - Cat. II).
Functions:
a. Performs preventive maintenance on communications equipment;
b. Maintains detailed records of calls and activities;
c. Performs staff functions and other related duties that may, from time to time, be assigned by the superior.
e. Administrative Assistant II (Data Entry Machine Operator I) SG-6
Qualifications:
a. Completion of two (2) years in college or High School graduate with relevant vocational/trade course;
b. Experience not required;
c. Training not required; and
d. Data Encoder (MC 10 s.2010) /Career Service (Sub- professional) First Level Eligibility.
Functions:
a. Gathers and compiles data and information required in the preparation of accomplishment and situational reports;
b. Generates reports;
c. Performs back-up operations;
d. Updates and maintains database;
e. Performs staff functions and other related duties that may from time to time, be assigned by the superior.
f. Administrative Assistant VI (Clerk III) SG-8
Qualifications:
a. Completion of two (2) years in college or High School graduate with relevant vocational/trade course;
b. Experience not required;
c. Training not required; and
d. Communications Equipment Operator (MC 10, s. 2010 - Cat. II).
Functions:
a. Serves as the incoming and outgoing document clerk;
b. Performs document management, filing, scanning, data entry to DTS;
c. Performs other administrative and clerical tasks as assigned by the supervisor;
d. Renders duty support during Disaster Response Operations;
e. Performs other tasks that may be assigned by the supervisor.

--- [Page 38] ---
Page 38 of 54
Ord. No. 0866-22
g. Administrative Assistant IV (Clerk II) SG-4
Qualifications:
a. Completion of two (2) years in college;
b. Experience not required;
c. Training not required;
d. Career Service (Sub-professional) First Level Eligibility.
Functions:
a. Receives, records, and releases applications for marriage, registration of births including registration of death and other miscellaneous documents for registration;
b. Undertakes the typing/encoding activities of the district;
c. Does other related functions as may be directed by the Department Head.
h. Administrative Aide IV (Driver II) SG-4
Qualifications:
d. Elementary School Graduate;
e. Training not required;
f. Experience not required;
g. Professional Driver's License (MC 10, s. 2013 - Cat IV).
Functions:
a. Safely and efficiently transports personnel, office supplies and equipment using the office vehicle;
b. Undertakes the proper maintenance and care of the vehicles to ascertain that the said vehicles are in good running condition;
c. Prepares reports on fuel and oil consumption as well as the distance traveled in submission to the City Accountant's Office or City General Services Office;
d. Accomplishes trip tickets by using the Daily Authorized Trips Summary to ensure that the trips are recorded and official;
e. Does other related functions as may be directed by the Department Head.
i. Administrative Aide III (Utility Worker II) SG-3
Qualifications:
a. Must be able to read and write;
b. Training not required;
c. Experience not required;
d. No Civil Service Eligibility Required (MC 10, s. 2013 - Cat III).
Functions:
a. Maintains the cleanliness and sanitation of the office by cleaning the furniture and office equipment, throwing of waste and garbage, mopping of the floor, and washing of dishes and other utensils used in the office in order to have a conducive, presentable, safe, and healthy working environment;
b. Stores various housekeeping supplies for proper utilization and control;
c. Arranges office decorations in connection with the observance of various public holidays and other celebrations;

--- [Page 39] ---
Page 39 of 54
Ord. No. 0866-22

d. Locks and unlocks the padlocks of the office to ensure its safety and security;
e. Does other functions as may be directed by the Department Head.

4. Risk Assessment and Monitoring Section

a. Engineer II SG-16

Qualifications:
a. Bachelor's degree in Engineering relevant to the job;
b. One (1) year of relevant experience;
c. Four (4) hours of relevant training;
d. Civil Service Eligibility - R.A. 1080.

Functions:
a. Conducts and coordinates inspections and monitoring of probable performance of existing and new infrastructures and other critical facilities (Infrastructure Audit);
b. Initiates preliminary draft of technical information and conducts preparatory safety analysis of survey data;
c. Provides technical assistance on engineering functions and development plans and recommends strengthening and rehabilitation;
d. Performs related duties as required.

b. Geologist II SG-15

Qualifications:
a. Bachelor of Science in Geology or Bachelor of Science/Arts major in Geology;
b. One (1) year of relevant experience;
c. Four (4) hours of relevant training;
d. Civil Service Eligibility - R.A. 1080.

Functions:
a. Ensures environmental and other regulations are met in construction and production projects;
b. Consults on various geology-related issues like waste management, resource management, earthquakes, floods, etc.;
c. Conducts quality control on the suitability of material (e.g. metals for construction purposes) and inspect projects;
d. Surveys sites and creates logs (e.g. borehole) and maps using GIS;
e. Gathers and analyzes geological data;
f. Coordinates research programs;
g. Performs related duties as required.

c. Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Officer I SG-11

Qualifications:
a. Bachelor's degree;
b. No experience required;
c. No training required;
d. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.

--- [Page 40] ---
Page 40 of 54
Ord. No. 0866-22

Functions:
a. Drafts policies and protocols for identifying, monitoring, and managing all types of risks;
b. Assists in the risk identification, assessment, monitoring, and contributes to the risk and control reporting process; Drafts Situation Report;
c. Manages the process for monitoring and resource tracking;
d. Assists in the cross checking of data;
e. Performs staff functions and other related duties that may, from time to time, be assigned by the superior.

d. Local Disaster Risk Reduction Management Assistant SG-8

Qualifications:
a. Completion of two (2) years in college;
b. One (1) year of relevant experience on DRRM;
c. Four (4) hours of relevant training on DRRM;
d. Career Service (Sub-professional) First Level Eligibility.

Functions:
a. Acts as the repository of statistical data, information, and reports of calamities/disasters; Facilitates and monitors the timely submission of Field Assessment Report; Maintains and updates the database; arranges and attend briefings and meetings;
b. Arranges and attend briefings and meetings;
c. Facilitates the field visits;
d. Performs other duties as required.

F. Regular Positions under the Local Emergency Communications and Response Division (Central 911):

1. Special Operations Officer IV SG-22

Qualifications:
a. Bachelor's degree;
b. Three (3) years of relevant experience in DRRM;
c. Sixteen (16) hours of relevant training on DRRM;
d. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.

Functions:
a. Shall act as the Chief Operations Officer of the Davao City CENTRAL 911;
b. Shall ensure the proper management and response to various day-to-day emergencies, including disasters and calamities;
c. Pursues strategies that aims to maximize its existing operational capacity through strategic planning and management;
d. Facilitates acquisition, maintenance and upgrade of emergency resources in order to proactively benefit the general public;

--- [Page 41] ---
Page 41 of 54  
Ord. No. 0866-22  

e. Institutionalizes its programs and projects that will ensure improved efficiency and competency in terms of the delivery of emergency response services;  
f. Shall foster growth and development in terms of professionalizing the emergency management systems;  
g. Shall ensure that an efficient interoperability schemes and strategic coordination, as well as structured management/command systems are consistently undertaken. It shall institutionalize linkages with the different operation centers and other response agencies; and  
h. Performs other function/s in relation to emergency response, as directed.  

2. Special Operations Officer III SG-18  

Qualifications:  
a. Bachelor's degree;  
b. Two (2) years of relevant experience on DRRM;  
c. Eight (8) hours of relevant training on DRRM; and  
d. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.  

Functions:  
a. Shall assist the Special Operations Officer IV in the conduct of the division's functions  
b. Ensures that Call Takers and Dispatchers follow Standard Operating Procedures based on the different type of calls;  
c. Conducts regular review and monitoring of the overall operations of Central 911;  
d. Informs the Center Head of Central 911 and the Department Head and assists in addressing important concerns regarding Central 911 concerns;  
e. Conducts personnel orientation and trainings, including personnel assessment;  
f. Coordinates with other agencies during complex emergencies;  
g. Develops a protocol on evacuation when affected by disasters and calamities that may result to infrastructure failure for the safety of its personnel and safekeeping of its equipment/resources;  
h. Perform other related task/s as directed by the Chief Operations Officer.  

3. Administrative Aide IV (Driver II) SG-4  

Qualifications:  
a. Elementary School Graduate;  
b. Training not required;  
c. Experience not required; and  
e. Professional Driver's License (MC 10, s. 2013 - Cat IV).

--- [Page 42] ---
Page 42 of 54  
Ord. No. 0866-22

Functions:
a. Provides safe and efficient transport services to all CENTRAL 911 personnel;
b. Conducts regular inspections of the assigned vehicle including its communication equipment and tools during their duty schedule;
c. Immediately reports to the Vehicle Maintenance In-charge for any issues/concerns, malfunction, breakdown or incidents. (An Incident Report must be prepared by the Vehicle Operator/Driver on-duty);
d. Responsible for the cleanliness of the assigned response vehicle;
e. Coordinates with the vehicle maintenance personnel in charge for proper scheduling of routine and periodic vehicle maintenance activities or repair needs;
f. Performs other related tasks as may be directed.

4. Security Guard I SG-3

Qualifications:
a. High School Graduate;
b. Four (4) hours of relevant training;
c. One (1) year of relevant experience;
d. Security Guard License (MC 10, s. 2013 - Cat III)

Functions:
a. Monitors and observes individuals for any suspicious acts and apprehends the same for questioning when necessary to ensure adequate protection and safety of government properties and its immediate surroundings;
b. Checks/inspects people coming in and out of the city government building;
c. Maintains peace and order in the government premises and apprehends violators of existing rules, regulations and ordinances;
d. Does other related functions as may be directed by the Department Head.

5. Administrative Aide III (Utility Worker II) SG-3

Qualifications:
a. Must be able to read and write;
b. Training not required;
c. Experience not required;
d. No Civil Service Eligibility Required (MC 10, s. 2013 - Cat III).

Functions:
a. Keep the facilities clean and in orderly condition;
b. Does specific duties, but are not limited to the following:
- Cleans and maintains CENTRAL 911 facilities;
- Performs janitorial and ground maintenance work;

--- [Page 43] ---
Page 43 of 54
Ord. No. 0866-22

- Disinfects and scrubs toilet facilities;
- Practices good garbage disposal system;
- Assists mechanics and other technical staff in testing, cleaning, and repairing utility systems; and
c. Performs other related work as required.

6. Emergency Communications Section
a. Special Operations Officer II SG-14

Qualifications:
a. Bachelor's degree;
b. One (1) year of relevant experience;
c. Four (4) hours of relevant training;
d. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.

Functions:
a. Shall act as the Shift Team Leader;
b. Oversees the operation of the assigned shift and reports directly to the Unit Chief;
c. Monitors the generation/collection of call records/information and ensures control and confidentiality of all information;
d. Provides assistance to call takers and dispatchers, when necessary, in extracting important information from the caller and dispatching of emergency resources;
e. Responsible for the monitoring of personnel attendance, personnel monthly checklist, etc., and conducts regular inventory of equipment;
f. Supervises the turn-over of duty of Call takers and Dispatchers from the out-going shift, and shall ensure that proper debriefing and debriefing sessions of the ECAPD personnel are being conducted especially after critical incidents;
g. Conducts performance review of the team members using the prescribed monthly scorecard form;
h. In the event of multi-casualty incidents, the Shift Team Leader shall act as the Communication Leader (Comm.);
i. During complex emergencies, the Shift Team Leader will dispatch the necessary resources based on the existing response protocols for different types of incidents;
j. Implements appropriate safety measures involving EMS Unit safe operations during incidents;
k. Monitors and/or anticipates the possible occurrence of risks and hazardous/unsafe situations during an emergency operation;
l. Performs other related task/s as directed by the Unit Chief.

--- [Page 44] ---
Page 44 of 54  
Ord. No. 0866-22  

b. Special Operations Officer I SG-10  

Qualifications:  
a. Bachelor's degree;  
b. Experience not required;  
c. Training not required;  
d. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.  

Functions:  
a. Shall act as the Team Leader (Search and Rescue Dog);  
b. Oversees the operation of the SAR Dog Team and reports directly to the Unit Chief;  
c. Shall ensure that proper defusing and debriefing sessions of the FAS personnel are being conducted especially after critical incidents;  
d. Conducts performance review of the team members using the prescribed monthly scorecard form and assessment for the SAR Dogs;  
e. Responsible for the monitoring of personnel attendance, personnel monthly checklist, etc., and conducts regular inventory of equipment;  
f. Implements appropriate safety measures involving SAR Dog Team safe operations during incidents and responses;  
g. Monitors and/or anticipates the possible occurrence of risks and hazardous/unsafe situations during an emergency operation;  
h. Performs other related task/s as directed by immediate supervisors.  

c. Administrative Assistant V (Communications Equipment Operator IV)  
SG-11  

Qualifications:  
a. Completion of two (2) years in college or High School graduate with relevant vocational/trade course;  
b. Two (2) years of relevant experience;  
c. Eight (8) hours of relevant training;  
d. Communication Equipment Operator (MC 10 s.2013 - Cat II).  

Functions:  
a. Receives, relays and transmits messages to all authorized receivers of communication; Handles outgoing, inter-office or incoming calls by operating switchboard to facilitate connections;  
b. Undertakes installation, preventive maintenance and checking of communications equipment;  
c. Maintains detailed records of calls and activities;  
d. Performs staff functions and other related duties that may, from time to time, be assigned by the superior.

--- [Page 45] ---
Page 45 of 54
Ord. No. 0866-22

d. Administrative Assistant III (Communications Equipment Operator II)
SG-9

Qualifications:
a. Completion of two (2) years in college or High School graduate with relevant vocational/trade course;
b. One (1) year of relevant experience;
c. Four (4) hours of relevant training;
d. Communication Equipment Operator (MC 10 s.2013 - Cat II).

Functions:
a. Receives and transmits radio messages from the City Mayor to the officials of the City Government including barangay officials;
b. Assists in logging all calls from the public and sees to it that important messages are properly disseminated to respective offices of persons
c. Receives and transmit messages from the employees to concerned individuals;
d. Does related work.

e. Administrative Aide VI (Communications Equipment Operator II) SG-6

Qualifications:
a. Completion of two (2) years in college or High School graduate with relevant vocational/trade course;
b. Experience not required;
c. Training not required;
d. Communication Equipment Operator (MC 10 s.2013 - Cat II).

Functions:
a. Receives, relays and transmits messages to all authorized receivers of communication;
b. Performs preventive maintenance on communications equipment;
c. Maintains detailed records of calls and activities;
d. Performs staff functions and other related duties that may, from time to time, be assigned by the superior.

7. Emergency Response Section
a. Special Operations Officer II SG-14

Qualifications:
a. Bachelor's degree;
b. One (1) year of relevant experience;
c. Four (4) hours of relevant training;
d. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.

Functions:
a. Shall act as the Shift Team Leader;
b. Oversees the operation for the assigned shift and reports directly to the Unit Chief;

--- [Page 46] ---
Page 46 of 54  
Ord. No. 0866-22  
c. Monitors the generation/collection of call records/information and ensures control and confidentiality of all information;  
d. Provides assistance to Call takers and Dispatchers, when necessary, in extracting important information from the caller and dispatching of emergency resources;  
e. Responsible for the monitoring of personnel attendance, personnel monthly checklist, etc. and conducts regular inventory of equipment;  
f. Supervises the turn-over of duty of Call takers and Dispatchers from the out-going shift, and shall ensure that proper defusing and debriefing sessions of the ECAPP personnel are being conducted especially after critical incidents;  
g. Conducts performance review of the team members using the prescribed monthly scorecard form;  
h. In the event of multi-casualty incidents, the Shift Team Leader shall act as the Communication Leader (CommI);  
i. During complex emergencies, the Shift Team Leader will dispatch the necessary resources based on the existing response protocols for different types of incidents; and  
j. Performs other related tasks/s as directed by the Unit Chief.  
k. Implements appropriate safety measures involving EMS Unit safe operations during incidents;  
l. Monitors and/or anticipates the possible occurrence of risks and hazardous/unsafe situations during an emergency operation;  
m. Performs staff functions and other related duties that may, from time to time, be assigned by the superior.  
b. Special Operations Officer I SG-10  
Qualifications:  
a. Bachelor's degree;  
b. Experience not required;  
c. Training not required;  
d. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.  
Functions:  
a. Shall act as the Team Leader (Search and Rescue Dog);  
b. Oversees the operation of the SAR Dog Team and reports directly to the Unit Chief;  
c. Shall ensure that proper defusing and debriefing sessions of the FAS personnel are being conducted especially after critical incidents;  
d. Conducts performance review of the team members using the prescribed monthly scorecard form and assessment for the SAR Dogs;  
e. Responsible for the monitoring of personnel attendance, personnel monthly checklist, etc. and conducts regular inventory of equipment;

--- [Page 47] ---
Page 47 of 54  
Ord. No. 0866-22

f. Implements appropriate safety measures involving SAR Dog Team safe operations during incidents and responses;  
g. Monitors and/or anticipates the possible occurrence of risks and hazardous/unsafe situations during an emergency operation;  
h. Performs other related tasks as directed by the Unit Chief.

c. Administrative Aide IV (Driver II) SG-4  
Qualifications:  
a. Elementary School Graduate;  
b. Training not required;  
c. Experience not required; and  
d. Professional Driver's License (MC 10, s. 2013 - Cat IV)  

Functions:  
a. Provides safe and efficient transport services to all CENTRAL 911 personnel;  
b. Conducts regular inspections of the assigned vehicle including its communication equipment and tools during their duty schedule;  
c. Immediately reports to the Vehicle Maintenance In-Charge for any issues/concerns, malfunction, breakdown or incidents. (An Incident Report must be prepared by the Vehicle Operator/Driver on-duty);  
d. Responsible for the cleanliness of the assigned response vehicle;  
e. Coordinates with the vehicle maintenance personnel in charge for proper scheduling of routine and periodic vehicle maintenance activities or repair needs;  
f. Performs other related tasks as may be directed.

G. Regular Positions under the Information and Communication Technology Division  
1. Information Technology Officer I SG-19  
Qualifications:  
a. Bachelor's degree;  
b. Two (2) years of relevant experience;  
c. Eight (8) hours of relevant training; and  
d. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.  

Functions:  
a. Supervises the day-to-day activity of the division in relation to its mandated functions;  
b. Acts as Security Officer for the Network and Systems Development Operations and assist in the conduct of trainings.

--- [Page 48] ---
Page 48 of 54
Ord. No. 0866-22

c. Consults with and assists the other units in the office with regards to systems and procedures, records, control, and security;
d. Establishes a reliable monitoring system of the network to maintain and ensure secured database;
e. Formulates database structures and designs;
f. Recommends to the Department Head other measures in systems development;
g. Supervises the installation and configuration of computer hardware, software, systems, networks, printers, and scanners;
h. Supervises the troubleshooting, support, and repair when IT equipment or networks malfunction;
i. Performs other related functions as may be directed by the Department Head.

2. Systems Section
a. Information Systems Analyst II SG-16
Qualifications:
a. Bachelor's degree;
b. One (1) year of relevant experience;
c. Four (4) hours of relevant training;
d. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.
Functions:
a. Acts as Project Team Leader in managing the development and implementation of different systems;
b. Defines data requirements for system study;
c. Reports periodically to the Division Head regarding progress of system operations;
d. Assigns programming jobs to programmers;
e. Documents systems for future reference;
f. Does other related tasks

b. Information Systems Analyst I SG-12
Qualifications:
a. Bachelor's degree relevant to the job;
b. One (1) year of relevant experience;
c. Four (4) hours of relevant training;
d. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.
Functions:
a. Develops design specifications;
b. Prepares documentation on design specifications which includes workflows and user procedures manual;
c. Gathers user requirements on systems for development, organize and document findings into design specifications;
d. Closely works with a Programmer Leader during system development and deployment;
e. Discusses to the team the design specifications;
f. Does other related functions as may be directed by the superior.

--- [Page 49] ---
Page 49 of 54  
Ord. No. 0866-22  

c. Computer Programmer I SG-11  
Qualifications:  
a. Bachelor's degree relevant to the job;  
b. Experience not required;  
c. Training not required; and  
d. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.  

Functions:  
a. Develops and prepares documentation on design specifications which includes workflows and user procedures manual;  
b. Analyzes research materials related to information and technologies that may help in defining design specifications;  
c. Coordinates with the Information Tech. I during system development and deployment; and  
d. Performs other related functions as may be directed by the Supervisor.  

d. Information Systems Researcher I SG-10  
Qualifications:  
a. Bachelor's degree relevant to the job;  
b. Experience not required;  
c. Training not required; and  
d. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.  

Functions:  
a. Conducts research on related information and technologies that may help in defining design specifications;  
b. Gathers user requirements on systems for development, organize and document findings into design specifications;  
c. Assess computer technologies to find innovative uses and applications;  
d. Develop new tools and methods for computer use and design experiments to test systems capabilities; and  
e. Performs other duties as required.  

3. Operations and Maintenance Section  
a. Computer Maintenance Technologist II SG-15  
Qualifications:  
a. Bachelor's degree;  
b. One (1) year of relevant experience;  
c. Four (4) hours of relevant training; and  
d. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.  

Functions:  
a. Performs preventive maintenance and basic corrective maintenance on the city's peripherals and data communication equipment system;  
b. Ensures the efficient and effective operation of a computer system of auxiliary equipment directly associated with computer;  
c. Maintains close coordination with the users in the event of hardware malfunction;  
d. Enforces standards and procedures for equipment operation data and installation security and trouble-shooting;

--- [Page 50] ---
Page 50 of 54  
Ord. No. 0866-22  

e. Sees to it that basic equipment used in service maintenance are working properly  
f. Coordinates with the supply section regarding spare parts and other requirements;  
g. Performs other duties as required  

b. Computer Maintenance Technologist I SG-I1  
Qualifications:  
a. Bachelor's degree relevant to the job;  
b. Experience not required;  
c. Training not required;  
d. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.  

Functions:  
a. Assists the Computer Maintenance Technologist II in carrying out duties associated with the efficient and effective operation of a computer system of auxiliary equipment directly associated with computer;  
b. Assists in the maintenance and closely coordinate with the users in the event of hardware malfunction;  
c. Assists in the enforcement of standards and procedures for equipment operation data and installation, security and trouble-shooting;  
d. Sees to it that basic equipment used in service maintenance are working properly  
e. Coordinates with the supply section regarding spare parts and other requirements; and  
f. Performs other duties as required.  

c. Administrative Assistant III (Computer Operator II) SG-9  
Qualifications:  
a. Completion of two (2) years in college or High School graduate with relevant vocational/trade course;  
b. One (1) year of relevant experience;  
c. Four (4) hours of relevant training;  
d. Career Service (Sub-Professional) First Level Eligibility.  

Functions:  
a. Performs various computer operations, encode and print data such as reports, transmittals, financial statements, etc.;  
b. Loads and unloads programs, operating system and utility software to ensure computer units are up and running at all times;  
c. Under general supervision, maintains the good condition of the equipment;  
d. Logs data and maintains records of peripheral devices, storage media and other related equipment to monitor condition of the machines;  
e. Maintains the security to ensure confidentiality and integrity of records;  
f. Does other functions as may be directed by the Department Head.

--- [Page 51] ---
Page 51 of 54  
Ord. No. 0866-22  
d. Administrative Assistant II (Data Controller II) SG-8  
Qualifications:  
a. Completion of two (2) years in college or High School graduate with relevant vocational/trade course;  
b. One (1) year of relevant experience;  
c. Four (4) hours of relevant training;  
d. Career Service (Sub-Professional) First Level Eligibility or Data Encoder (MC 6, s. 2010).  
Functions:  
a. Coordinates operations of computer systems in various departments/agencies, including coordination of collection and storage needs of users;  
b. Establishes data dictionary that records the office data definition and standards, including installation and maintenance of a systems library;  
c. Performs computer operations in data entry and processing; Loads and unloads programs, operating systems and utilities, software;  
e. Prepares and submits periodic summary and exception reports whenever necessary; and  
f. Provides direct technical assistance to superiors as well as perform such other duties as may be directed.  
e. Administrative Assistant II (Electronics and Communications Equipment Technician II) SG-8  
Qualifications:  
a. Completion of two (2) years in college or High School graduate with relevant vocational/trade course;  
b. One (1) year of relevant experience;  
c. Four (4) hours of relevant training;  
d. Career Service (Sub-Professional) First Level Eligibility or Electronics Equipment Technician (MC 10, s. 2013 - Cat. II).  
Functions:  
a. Installs, troubleshoots and repairs electronics and computer equipment used in different segment in electronic communications;  
b. Performs preventive maintenance; Updates software and run test on existing equipment; Maintains reports and manuals; and  
c. Performs staff functions and other related duties that may, from time to time, be assigned by the superior.  
SECTION 9. APPOINTMENT - The positions in the CDRMO shall be appointed by the City Mayor in accordance with civil service laws and rules making sure that the appointee shall have met the qualification standards set by the Civil Service Commission.

--- [Page 52] ---
Page 52 of 54  
Ord. No. 0866-22  

SECTION 10. ACCREDITATION, MOBILIZATION AND PROTECTION OF DISASTER VOLUNTEERS AND NATIONAL SERVICE RESERVE CORPS, CIVIL SOCIETY ORGANIZATIONS AND PRIVATE SECTOR - Community/barangay disaster volunteers operating within the territorial jurisdiction of Davao City shall be accredited by the LDRRMC.  
A. The Local Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Council (LDRRMC) through the Local Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Office (LDRRMO) may mobilize Civil Society Organizations (CSOs), private sectors, individuals, and organized volunteers to augment its personnel and logistical requirements in the delivery of disaster risk reduction programs and activities.  
B. The City Government shall take full responsibility for the enhancement, welfare and protection of all Accredited Community Disaster Volunteers, and shall submit the list of volunteers to the Office of Civil Defense (OCD) through the CDRRMO in the database of community disaster volunteers.  
C. Accreditation and mobilization of volunteers shall be in accordance with the guidelines formulated by the National Disaster and Risk Reduction Management Council (NDRRMC) consistent with the provisions of Republic Act No. 10121 or the "Philippine Disaster Risk Reduction and Management Act of 2010".  
D. The LDRRMC shall set the minimum standards on the protection and compensatory benefits of Accredited Community Disaster Volunteers in accordance with the guidelines formulated by the NDRRMC. Other benefits to ACVDs may be set by the LDRRMC pursuant to R.A. 10121, based on the availability of funds, and following present enabling policies, auditing rules and regulations.  

SECTION 11. CMO-CITY DISASTER RISK REDUCTION AND MANAGEMENT OFFICE (CDRRMO) - The regular personnel of CDRRMO as a division of the City Mayor's Office shall be transferred to the CDRRMO as a department pursuant to Civil Service Commission's Omnibus Rules on Appointments and Other Human Resource Actions.  

SECTION 12. CENTRAL COMMUNICATIONS AND EMERGENCY RESPONSE CENTER AND CMO-COMMUNICATION UNIT - The Central Communications and Emergency Response Center of Davao City, otherwise known as Central 911, and the City Mayor's Office-Communications Unit shall be included in the CDRRMO. Central 911 shall be merged with the Local Emergency Communications and Response Division of CDRRMO. The City Mayor's Office-Communications Unit shall be hereby abolished. Regular personnel of the City Mayor's Office-Communications Unit shall be transferred to the CDRRMO pursuant to the Civil Service Commission's Omnibus Rules on Appointments and Other Human Resource Actions.  

SECTION 13. MANPOWER COMPLEMENT - The City Mayor shall be allowed to employ emergency personnel or laborers needed by the CDRRMO through Job Orders or Contract of Services based on the availability of budget pursuant to Section 77 of Republic Act No. 7160, otherwise known as the "Local Government Code of 1991" and subject to government rules and regulations on budgeting, accounting and auditing.

--- [Page 53] ---
**Page 53 of 54**

**Ord. No. 0866-22**

**SECTION 14. APPROPRIATION -** The appropriation necessary for the implementation of this Ordinance shall be included by the City Budget Officer in the proposed Annual Budget of the City Government.

**SECTION 15. LOCAL DISASTER RISK REDUCTION AND MANAGEMENT FUND (LDRRMF) -** Section 21 of Republic Act No. 10121 states that the LDRRMF amounting to not less than five percent (5%) of the estimated revenue from regular sources shall be set aside to support disaster risk management activities such as, but not limited to, the pre-disaster preparedness programs including trainings, purchase of disaster response and rescue equipment, supplies and medicines, for post-disaster response and rescue equipment, supplies and medicines, for post-disaster activities, and payment of premiums on calamity insurance.

A. Allocation

Joint Memorandum Circular No. 2013-1, dated March 25, 2013, of NDRRMC, Department of Budget and Management (DBM) and the Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG) states that the LDRRMF shall cover the thirty percent (30%) lump-sum allocation for Quick Response Fund (QRF) and the seventy percent (70%) allocation for disaster prevention and mitigation, preparation, response, rehabilitation and recovery.

B. Utilization

Joint Memorandum Circular No. 2013-1, dated March 25, 2013, of NDRRMC, DBM and DILG details the utilization of LDRRMF which includes Disaster Prevention and Mitigation, Disaster Preparedness, Disaster Response, Disaster Rehabilitation and Recovery, and Procurement/Acquisition of Disaster Response and Rescue Activities.

C. Update of Allocation, Utilization and Other Provisions of the Law

Allocation and utilization of LDRRMF shall follow updated guidelines, memorandum circulars, laws, rules and regulations pursuant to the objectives of RA 10121.

**SECTION 16. SEPARABILITY CLAUSE -** If, for any reason, any section or provision of this Ordinance shall be held unconstitutional or invalid, other parts or provisions thereof which are not affected shall continue to be in full force and effect.

**SECTION 17. REPEALING CLAUSE -** Any ordinance, order, memorandum, rules and regulations which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby modified or repealed accordingly.

**SECTION 18. EFFECTIVITY -** This Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon approval.

**ENACTED, on the 25th day of January 2022, by an unanimous vote of all the Members of the Sanggunian, there being a quorum.**

**CERTIFIED CORRECT:**

**CHARITO N. SANTOS**

Secretary to the Sanggunian Panlungsod  
(City Government Department Head II)

--- [Page 54] ---
Page 54 of 54
Ord. No. 0866-22

ATTESTED:
EDGAR P. IBUYAN JR.
President Pro Tempore/
Temporary Presiding Officer
cns/Johanna

APPROVED:
MAR 2 B 2022
2022

SARA Z. DUTERTE
City Mayor

SEBASTIAN Z. DUTERTE
Acting City Mayor

ATTESTED:
ATTY. ZULEIKA T. LÓPEZ
City Administrator

AN ORDINANCE UPDATING THE ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE OF THE CITY DISASTER RISK REDUCTION AND MANAGEMENT OFFICE (CDRMO) AND PROVIDING FUNDS THEREOF, SUBJECT TO ALL LAWS AND EXISTING LEGAL RULES AND REGULATIONS