=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 0100-22 (creating DCDAC) ===

--- [Page 1] ---
Republic of the Philippines
City of Davao
Office of the Sangguniang Panlungsod

20th City Council
18th Regular Session
Series of 2022

Present:

Vice Mayor
J. Melchor B. Quitain Jr.
Councillor
Marissa S. Abella
Councillor
Nino A. Abella Jr.
Councillor
Luna Maria Dominique S. Acosta
Councillor
Bali Hundra Cassandra Dominique N. Advincula
Councillor
Bernard E. Al-ag
Councillor
Wilberto E. Al-ag
Councillor
Al Ryan S. Alejandre
Councillor
Dante L. Apostol Sr.
Councillor
Conrado C. Baluran
Councillor
Rafael B. Bongayuan
Councillor
Pilar C. Braga
Councillor
Augusto Javier G. Campos III
Councillor
Jonard C. Dayap
Councillor
Edgar P. Ibyuan Jr.
Councillor
Diosdado Angelo Jr.-Balagudill
Councillor
Diosdado Angelo Junior R. Mahipus
Councillor
Rodolfo M. Mande
Councillor
Jaffar U. Marhomsallic
Councillor
Bonz Andre A. Militar
Councillor
Temenujin B. Ocampo
Councillor
Rafael P. Oquendo-Ortiz
Councillor
Alberto T. Ungab
Councillor
Lorenzo Benjamin D. Villafuerte
Councillor
Jesus Joseph P. Zozobra III

Absent:

Councillor
Louie John J. Bonguyan
Councillor
Edgar R. Ibyuan Sr.
Councillor
Trisha Ann J. Villafuerte

Ordinance No. 0100-22
Series of 2022

An Ordinance Creating the Davao City Disability Affairs Council (OCDAC), Determining Its Duties, Powers and Functions

--- [Page 2] ---
Page 2 of 10
Ord. No. 0100-22

Be it ordained by the Honorable Sangguniang Panlungsod of Davao City, in session assembled, that:

SECTION 1. TITLE - This Ordinance shall be known as "AN ORDINANCE CREATING THE DAVAO CITY DISABILITIES AFFAIRS COUNCIL (DCDAC), DETERMINING ITS DUTIES, POWERS AND FUNCTIONS".

SECTION 2. DECLARATION OF PRINCIPLES AND POLICIES

1. Section 1 (b) (1) of Republic Act No. 10070 entitled "An Act Establishing an Institutional Mechanism to Ensure the Implementation of Programs and Services for Persons with Disabilities in Every Province, City and Municipality, Amending Republic Act No. 7277, Otherwise Known as the 'Magna Carta for Disabled Persons'". The Local Chief Executive shall appoint in each province, city and municipality, the Local Chief Executive shall appoint a PWD Affairs Officer who shall manage and oversee the operations of the office, pursuant to its mandate under this Act. Priority shall be given to qualified PWDs to head and man the said office in carrying out the following functions:...

2. Title II of R.A. No. 7277, entitled "An Act Providing for the Rehabilitation, Self-Development and Self-Reliance of Disabled Person and Their Integration into the Mainstream of Society and for Other Purposes" states the rights and privileges of each person encompassing employment, sheltered employment, apprenticeship, incentives for employer, vocational rehabilitation, guidance and counseling, access to quality education, assistance to disabled persons, special education, non-formal education, vocational or technical and other training programs, political and civil rights, and other stated rights and privileges.

3. Rule XI of the Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) states that the "National Council for Welfare of Disabled Persons shall monitor the implementation of these Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) of the Magna Carta for Disabled Persons. A monitoring scheme machinery shall be formulated to provide regular and up-to-date information on the progress of its enforcement".

4. Batas Pambansa Bilang 344, entitled "An Act to Enhance Mobility of Disabled Persons by Requiring Certain Buildings, Institutions, Establishments and Public Utilities to Install Facilities and Other Devices", promotes the rights of Persons with Disabilities.

5. Executive Order No. 34, Series of 2014, was signed and approved by then City Mayor Rodrigo R. Duterte, which established an Interim Persons with Disability Affairs Office in the City of Davao.

6. Executive Order No. 19, Series of 2003, reorganizes the City Council for the Welfare of Disabled Persons (CCWPD), amending Executive Order No. 23, dated July 22, 1998.

7. Memorandum Circular 2017-119, issued on September 13, 2017, by the Department of the Interior and Local Government stated the guidelines for the establishment of Persons with Disabilities Affairs Office (PDAO) and the conduct of the Persons with Disabilities general assembly.

8. Presidential Decree No. 1509 issued on July 11, 1978, created the National Commission Concerning Disabled Persons (NCCDP).

--- [Page 3] ---
Page 3 of 10  
Ord. No. 0100-22

9. Executive Order No. 232, issued on July 22, 1987, provided for the structural and functional reorganization of NCCDP to the National Council for the Welfare of Disabled Persons (NCWDP).

10. Executive Order No. 709, issued on February 28, 2008, renamed NCWDP to the National Council on Disability Affairs (NCDA), attached to the Office of the President.

11. Executive Order No. 33, Series of 2011, was issued on April 5, 2011, transferring the National Council on Disability Affairs (NCDA) from the Office of the President to the Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD).

12. The National Council on Disability Affairs (NCDA) is mandated as the government policy-making, planning, monitoring, and advocacy body for the prevention of the causes of disability, the rehabilitation of Persons with Disabilities, and the equalization of opportunities for these persons in a rights-based society. NCDA shall lead in the implementation of programs and projects for the disabled.

SECTION 3. DEFINITION OF TERMS AND ACRONYMS

R.A. No. 10070  
Republic Act No. 10070 entitled "An Act Establishing an Institutional Mechanism to Ensure the Implementation of Programs and Services for Persons With Disabilities in Every Province, City and Municipality, Amending Republic Act No. 7277, Otherwise Known as the 'Magna Carta for Disabled Persons'."

R.A. No. 7277  
Republic Act No. 7277 entitled "An Act Providing for the Rehabilitation, Self-Development, and Self-Reliance of Disabled Persons and Their Integration into the Mainstream of Society and For Other Purposes," otherwise known as the "Magna Carta for Disabled Persons."

E.O. 23, s. 2014  
Executive Order No. 34, Series of 2014, entitled "An Order Creating an Interim Persons with Disability Affairs Office (IPDAO), Defining Its Functions and For Other Purposes," was signed and approved by then Mayor Rodolfo R. Duterte and released on July 21, 2014.

E.O. 19, s. 2003  
Executive Order No. 19, Series of 2003, entitled "Reorganizing the 'City Council for the Welfare for Disabled Persons (CCWDP)' and Amending Executive Order No. 23 dated July 22, 1998."

E.O. 23, s. 1998  
Executive Order No. 23, Series of 1998, entitled "Reorganizing the Davao City Council for the Welfare of Disabled Persons (DCCWDP)" and Amending Executive Order No. 41, dated September 10, 1993."

--- [Page 4] ---
Page 4 of 10
Ord. No. 0100-22
Batas Pambansa Blg. 344
An Act to Enhance Mobility of Disabled Persons by Requiring Certain Buildings, Institutions, Establishments and Public Utilities to Install Facilities and Other Devices.
IRR
Implementing Rules and Regulations.
LGU
Local Government Unit
PWD
Persons with Disabilities (PWD) as defined in the IRR of R.A. 10070 include those who have long-term physical, mental, intellectual or sensory impairments which, in combination with various barriers, may hinder their full and effective participation in society on an equal basis with others (UNCRPD Article 1).
UNCRPD
United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (UNCRPD) is an international human rights convention which affirms the human rights of people with disability.
PDAC-PDAO DC
Persons with Disability Affairs Center - The Persons with Disability Affairs Office of Davao City
NCCDP
National Commission Concerning Disabled Persons
NCWDP
National Council for the Welfare of Disabled Persons.
NCDA
National Council on Disability Affairs
DSWD
Department of Social Welfare and Development;
CSWDO
City Social Welfare and Development Office;
PDAC
Persons with Disabilities Affairs Center
PDAO
Persons with Disabilities Affairs Office
DDCAC
Davao City Disability Affairs Council
DDAC
District Disability Affairs Council
BDAC
Barangay Disability Affairs Council

--- [Page 5] ---
Page 5 of 10
Ord. No. 0100-22

FPD Federation of Person with Disabilities (FPD) refers to a group composed of organizations of and for Persons with Disabilities from the national, regional, provincial, city and municipal levels (IRR of R.A. No. 10070).
DPO Disabled People's Organization (DPO) refers to an organization organized and controlled by Persons with Disabilities (IRR of R. A. 10070).
PWD-Oriented Organizations Organizations with advocacies on PWDs.

SECTION 4. CREATION OF DAVAO CITY DISABILITY AFFAIRS COUNCIL (DCCDAC)
The Davao City Disability Affairs Council shall be created to focus on information drive and advocacy of the laws that benefit Persons with Disabilities. It will serve as an advisory and consultative body of PDAC-PDAO DC, and may recommend measures to be legislated by the Sangguniang Panlungsod.
A. DCCDAC Shall be composed of the following:
1. The City Mayor or designated representative as chairperson;
2. The Department Head of the City Social Welfare and Development Office as the co-chairperson;
3. Any of the members shall act as the vice chairperson as designated by the chairperson and concurred by majority of the council members;
4. Membership shall be composed of:
a. One (1) member from the Sangguniang Panlungsod ng Dabaw representing local legislation;
b. One (1) member from the Public Employment Service Office (PESO) representing employment;
c. One (1) member from the City Human Resource Management Office (HRMO) representing employment;
d. One (1) member from the Department of Education (DepEd) representing basic education;
e. One (1) member from the Commission on Higher Education (CHED) representing tertiary education;
f. One (1) member from the Department of Health (DOH) representing health;
g. One (1) member from the City Health Office (CHO) representing health;
h. One (1) member from the Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD) representing Auxiliary Social Services;

--- [Page 6] ---
Page 6 of 10
Ord. No. 0100-22

i. One (1) member from the City Information Technology Center (CITC) representing telecommunications;
j. One (1) member from the City Engineer's Office (CEO) representing accessibility;
k. One (1) member from the City Legal Office (CLO) representing political and civil rights;
l. One (1) member from the Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG) for LGU concerns;
m. One (1) member from the Public Safety and Security Office (PSSO) representing public safety;
n. One (1) member from Philippine Health Insurance Corporation;
o. One (1) member who is a PWD from the Women's Federation;
p. One (1) member who is a PWD from the Senior Citizen's Federation;
q. One (1) member representing the Parents Mobilization Action Group;
r. Three (3) members from the different District Disabilities Affairs Council;

B. The secretariat of DCDAC shall be composed of personnel from the Persons with Disabilities Center-PDAC of Davao City.

C. DCDAC shall convene at least once every quarter of the year, or upon the request of any of the chairpersons or the majority of such council through a written notice;

D. The members of DCDAC shall be appointed by the Department Head of the CSHDDO as recommended by PDAC-PDAO DC, and approved by the City Mayor, and reconstituted every three (3) years or upon approval by majority of the members;

E. Rules and procedures shall be formulated and adopted by DCDAC.

SECTION 5. POWERS, DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS OF DCDAC - The Davao City Disability Affairs Council (DCDAC) shall perform the following functions:

A. Formulate policies and other measures for legislation concerning the rights and well-being of disabled persons, monitors and evaluates the implementation of programs and services;

B. Conduct consultative meetings and prepare symposia with all stakeholders, and undertake program evaluation and monitoring to ensure that comprehensive, relevant, and timely programs and services are adequate and accessible to Persons with Disabilities;

--- [Page 7] ---
Page 7 of 10
Ord. No. 0100-22
C. Propose and recommend researches and studies relevant to formulated policies to promote and enhance at all levels the rights of Persons with Disabilities;
D. Monitor and evaluate the data bank on disability, in partnership with concerned government agencies and non-government organizations, to ensure availability of data to stakeholders and services to Persons with Disabilities including provision of assistive devices;
E. Establish and maintain linkages and networking with local and international organizations, including organizations of and for Persons with Disabilities to generate resources and the maximum utilization of existing resources and for purposes of convergence;
F. Serve as the core to the advocacy of the laws regarding Persons with Disabilities;
G. Assist in the establishment of self-help organization and the setting up of specific projects to draw out the active participation of Persons with Disabilities in the social and economic development of the country (Section 31, RA 7277).
H. Approve, monitor and evaluate policies, rules and regulations formulated by the Persons with Disabilities Center - The Persons with Disabilities Affairs Office of Davao City (PDAC-PDAO DC);
I. Regulate data and related information collated, stored and released by PDAC-PDAO DC pursuant to approved laws, rules and regulations;
J. Concur the composition of DDAC of every administrative district in the city as submitted by PDAC-PDAO DC;
K. Concur the rules and regulations of DDAC as approved by PDAC-PDAO DC;
L. Concur the accreditation of PWD organizations and PWD-oriented organizations by PDAC-PDAO DC;
M. Serve as an advisory and consultative body of the city on PWD matters;
N. Perform other functions pertaining to policy-making, planning, monitoring, advocacy for the prevention of the causes of disability, rehabilitation of Persons with Disabilities, and the equalization of opportunities for PWDs.
SECTION 6. CREATION OF DISTRICT DISABILITY AFFAIRS COUNCIL (DDAC) - The District Disability Affairs Council (DDAC) shall be created in all administrative districts of the City of Davao as the district-based coordinating body of DDAC, and assist in the implementation of programs and activities as designated by PDAC-PDAO DC;
A. DDAC shall be composed of seven (7) members from any of the barangays of the administrative district;
B. DDAC shall elect a set of officers among its members as specified by the rules and regulations set by PDAC-PDAO DC;

--- [Page 8] ---
Page 8 of 10  
Ord. No. 0100-22  
C. DDAC shall convene at least once every quarter of the year upon the request of the chairperson or the majority of such council;  
D. DDAC shall adopt the approved rules and regulations recommended by the PDAC-PDAO DC and as concurred by DCDAC;  
E. DDAC shall keep records of all members of every PWD organization in the administrative district, including its address and other contact information;  
F. Members of DDAC shall be submitted to PDAC-PDAO DC, for approval and concurrence by DCDAC;  
G. All pertinent information of the members and member organizations of DDAC shall be submitted to PDAC-PDAO DC.  
SECTION 7. POWERS, DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS OF DDAC - The duties and responsibilities of the District Disability Affairs Council are:  
A. Assist in monitoring the implementation of policies, pertinent laws, rules, and regulations by PDAC-PDAO DC;  
B. Coordinate, monitor and evaluate the implementation of policies, plans, and programs for PWDs in the administrative district;  
C. Disseminate to the residents of the barangay all messages and other information coming from DCDAC or PDAC-PDAO DC;  
D. Recommend to DCDAC or PDAC-PDAO DC any projects, activities or laws needed for the welfare and development of PWDs;  
E. Assist DCDAC and PDAC-PDAO DC in the performance of their functions, duties and powers;  
F. Maintain a database or records of PWDs in the administrative district, as well as existing PWD organizations or organizations with advocacy on PWD, with the respective pertinent information;  
G. Advocate and promote policies according to internationally, nationally and locally accepted standards for the welfare and development of PWDs;  
H. Perform other functions related to PWDs as requested by PDAC-PDAO DC or DCDAC.  
SECTION 8. ORGANIZATIONS FOR PWDs - Registered members of PWD in the city may form an association or organization as recognized by PDAC-PDAO DC. Other organizations composed of any members with PWD as the advocacy or one of its advocacies may apply for accreditation with PDAC-PDAO DC. All accredited organizations must be concurred by DCDAC.  
A. Barangay-based organizations or associations must be guided by the following:  
1. There should be at least fifteen (15) members of registered PWDs in a barangay to form an association or organization;

--- [Page 9] ---
Page 9 of 10  
Ord. No. 0100-22  
2. The name, address, members, and other pertinent information shall be submitted to PDAC-PDAO DC for approval, and copies of which shall be furnished to DDAC for concurrence;  
3. Rules and regulations for associations or organizations in a barangay shall be adopted from the guidelines for accreditation set by PDAC-PDAO DC;  
4. The association or organization of PWDs must have a president, vice president, secretary, treasurer, and other officers that may be required in the guidelines set by PDAC-PDAO DC;  
5. Pertinent information for barangay-based associations or organizations shall be submitted to PDAC-PDAO DC and copies shall be furnished to the Barangay Council.  
B. PWD-oriented organizations or associations shall be guided by the following:  
1. One of the advocacys or purposes of the organization or association shall cater to the PWDs of the city;  
2. The organization or association must register with PDAC-PDAO DC and pertinent information shall be provided to DDAC and the respective DDAC, if applicable;  
3. Requirements for registration and accreditation shall be set by PDAC-PDAO DC.  
C. PWD organizations or associations with members from the different administrative districts of the city shall register with PDAC-PDAO DC.  
1. Requirements for registration and accreditation shall be set by PDAC-PDAO DC;  
2. Copies of pertinent information as set by PDAC-PDAO DC shall be furnished to DDAC for concurrence;  
3. PDAC-PDAO DC shall approve the registration of PWD organizations with city-wide membership, and concurred by DDAC;  
D. Other organizations with mixed membership shall be guided by the following:  
1. Organizations composed of any members with an advocacy for PWDs may apply for accreditation with PDAC-PDAO DC;  
2. The organization may be local, national or international, as long as it meets the requirements for accreditation by PDAC-PDAO DC and pursuant to existing local and national laws, rules and regulations;  
3. Organizations must apply for accreditation with PDAC-PDAO DC and must be concurred by DDAC.  
SECTION 9 REMUNERATION - The City Mayor may provide honorarium to qualified members of the Davao City Disability Affairs Council and the District Disability Affairs Council.

--- [Page 10] ---
Page 10 of 10
Ord. No. 0100-22
A. Honorarium and other monetary benefits shall be subject to availability of budget;
B. Disbursement for honorarium and other monetary benefits shall be in accordance with existing circulars from the Department of Budget and Management, and government budgeting, accounting and auditing rules, regulations and procedures;
C. Amount of honorarium and other monetary benefits shall be determined by the City Budget Officer and approved by the City Mayor pursuant to government budgeting, accounting and auditing rules and regulations.
SECTION 10. SEPARABILITY CLAUSE - If, any section or part of this Ordinance is held unconstitutional or invalid, other sections or provisions not otherwise affected shall remain in full force and effect.
SECTION 11. EFFECTIVITY - This Ordinance shall take effect upon its approval.
ENACTED, on the 22nd day of November 2022, by an unanimous vote of all the Members of the Sanggunian, there being a quorum.
CERTIFIED CORRECT:
CHARITO N. SANTOS
Secretary to the Sangguniang Panlungsod
(Oty Government Department Head II)
ATTESTED:
J. MELCHOR B. QUITAIN JR.
Vice Mayor
Presiding Officer
ATTESTED:
ATTY. FRANCIS MARK H. LAYOG
Acting City Administrator
AN ORDINANCE CREATING THE DAVAO CITY DISABILITY AFFAIRS COUNCIL (DDCAC), DETERMINING STFR DUTIES, POWERS AND FUNCTIONS