=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 0632-21 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
Republic of the Philippines
City of Davao
Office of the Sangguniang Panlungsod

19th City Council
25th Regular Session
Series of 2021

PRESENT:

Councillor Edgar P. Ibyan Jr.
Councillor Ralph O. Abella
Councillor Nilo D. Abelerra
Councillor Maria Belen S. Acosta
Councillor Maria Jose A. Alexandra Dominique N. Advincula
Councillor Wilberto E. Al-ag
Councillor Dante L. Apostol Sr.
Councillor Conrado C. Baluran
Councillor Jessica M. Bonguyan
Councillor Louie John J. Bonguyan
Councillor Pilar C. Braga
Councillor Maria Elena G. Campos III
Councillor Danilo C. Dayanghirang
Councillor Jonard C. Dayap
Councillor Edgar R. Ibyan Sr.
Councillor Richlyn N. Justol-Baguiod
Councillor Pamela A. Librado-Morata
Councillor Diosdado Angelo Junior R. Mahipus
Councillor Bonifacio E. Millar
Councillor Maria Elena G. Daiano-Ortiz
Councillor Antoinette G. Principe-Castrodes
Councillor J. Melchor B. Quitain Jr.
Councillor Alberto T. Ungab
Councillor Mary Joselle D. Villafuerte
Councillor Jesus Joseph P. Zozobraño III

ABSENT:

Vice Mayor Sebastian Z. Duterte
Councillor Jaffar U. Marchomsalic

ORDINANCE NO. 0632-21
Series of 2021

AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE PROVISIONS OF
ORDINANCE NO. 5003 (COCKFIGHTING ORDINANCE OF
DAVAO CITY), SERIES OF 1997, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE
NEW COCKFIGHTING CODE OF DAVAO CITY TO INCLUDE E-
SABONG AS A MODE OF BETTING, AND AMUSEMENT FOR
LOCAL COCKFIGHTING AFicionados

--- [Page 2] ---
Page 2 of 14

Ord. No. 0632-21

Be it ordained by the Honorable Sangguniang Panlungsod of Davao City, in session assembled, that:

SECTION 1. TITLE - This Ordinance shall be known as "AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE PROVISIONS OF ORDINANCE NO. 5003 (COCKFIGHTING ORDINANCE OF DAVAO CITY), SERIES OF 1997, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE NEW COCKFIGHTING CODE OF DAVAO CITY TO INCLUDE E-SABONG AS A MODE OF BETTING, AND AMUSEMENT FOR LOCAL COCKFIGHTING AFICIONADOS".

SECTION 2. DEFINITION OF TERMS - As used in this Ordinance, the following terms shall be understood, construed, and applied as follows:

a) Cockfighting (Sabong) - shall embrace and mean the commonly known game or term "Cockfighting Derby", "Pintakasi", "Tupada", or its equivalent terms in different Philippine localities.

b) Cockpit (Sabongan) - The properly enclosed or fenced premise or compound provided with one or more gates or doors for definite points of entrance and exit, and licensed in accordance herewith for the holding of cockfighting derby, pintakasi, tupada, or its equivalent term in different Philippine localities.

c) Cockfight (Sotolad). - The actual fight or physical combat of two (2) pitted or evenly matched gamecocks, whether both sit on either side are laid down.

d) International Derby - Means a cockfight promotion with participants from different nations.

e) National Derby - means a cockfight promotion with nationwide participation.

f) Regional Derby - means a cockfight promotion with participants from a particular region.

g) Regular Cockfight - means a cockfight held on Sundays and/or Legal Holidays.

h) Special Cockfight - means a cockfight held on days other than Sundays and/or Legal Holidays for special purpose.

i) Special Permit - means a permit secured from the Sangguniang Panlungsod to hold cockfighting on day other than Sundays and Legal Holidays.

j) Cock Manager - A person who professionally, regularly and habitually manages the cock and gamecocks therein. He may or may not be owner of the cockpit himself.

k) Referee (Sentencador) - A person who watches and oversees the progress of the cockfight and decides its results by announcing the winner or declaring a draw or no contest game.

l) Bet Manager (Kasador) - A person who calls and takes care of bets from owners of both gamecocks and those of other betters before he orders commencement of the cockfight and thereafter, distributes winning bets to the winners after deducting a certain commission.

m) Bet-Taker (Kristo) - A person who participates in cockfights and with the use of money or other things of value, bets with other bettors, or through other bet-takers and wins or loses his bets depending upon the result of the cockfight as announced by the referee or sentencador.

n) Gaffer (Tutor) - A person who is engaged in the technique of arming gamecocks with gaffs of gaffs on either or both legs.

o) Handler (Sotolad) - A person who, personally takes physical custody and control, inside the area of a pitted gamecock and who actually releases the same for actual fight combat in a cockfight.

p) Promoter - A person licensed by the Sangguniang Panlungsod as such, who is engaged in the convening, meeting, holding and celebration of specially

--- [Page 3] ---
Page 3 of 14
Ord. No. 0632-21

programmed and arranged cockfighting like local and international derbies or competitions, special mains of matches or encounter, pinatikasí and ordinary fights of hawkfights;
q) Game cock – refers to domesticated fowls, whether imported or locally bred, as well as the native fighting cock indigenous to the country, especially bred, trained and conditioned for actual cockfighting or for propagation and breeding purposes for eventual use in cockfighting;
r) Breeder – A person engaged in gamecock breeding propagation for personal and/or commercial purposes for eventual use in cockfighting;
s) Cocker (Afficionado) – A person who participates and bets in cockfighting as a sports, amusements, recreation or form of relaxation.
t) Zoning law or Ordinance – Either or both national or local city legislation which logically arranges, prescribes, defines and apportions a given political subdivision into specific land uses at present and future projection, if needs warrant in accordance with the Housing and Land Use Regulatory Board.
u) E-Sabong – is defined as the online/remote or off-site wagering/betting on live cockfighting matches, events, and/or activities streamed or broadcasted live from cockpit area’s licensed or authorized by the Local Government Units having jurisdiction thereof.
v) Live Streaming – transmit or receive live video and audio coverage of an event over internet.
w) Data Streaming – a sequence of digitally encoded coherent signals used to transmit or received information that is in the process of being transmitted.
x) Franchise – an authorization granted by the Local Government of Davao City to an individual or group enabling them to carry out specified commercial activities.
y) Sultada – is one round of cockfighting.
z. Plasada – the percentage of the betting paid to the owner of a cockpit.
aa. Admission Fees – means any amount paid or consideration given for entrance, seats, tables, reserved or otherwise, and other similar accommodations, including charges for the use of facilities therein, irrespective of whether or not an admission ticket is issued in exchange for such admission fee or consideration.

SECTION 3. RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR TRADITIONAL SABONG – The Rules and Regulations of the Philippine Gamecock Commission, adopted on June 1, 1981, and the provisions of P.D., 1802 and other amendments, affecting cockpit, cockfighting, and cockpit personnel and P.D. 149, (Cockfighting Law of 1974) as amended, are hereby adopted by the City as part of this Ordinance, as follows:

COCKPIT AND COCKFIGHTING RULES AND REGULATIONS

a) Ownership, Operation and Management of Cockpits – Only Filipino citizens not otherwise influenced by existing laws, shall be allowed to own, manage and operate cockpits; provided that cooperative capitalization is encouraged.
b) Establishment of Cockpits – Only one (1) cockpit shall be allowed in each of the eleven (11) political districts namely: Poblacion, Talomo, Agdao, Buhangan, Bunawan, Paquilato, Toril, Tugbo, Calinan, Baguio and Marilong Districts and those that maybe hereafter created, except in political districts with a population of over one hundred thousand (100,000), two (2) cockpits may be established, maintained and operated.

--- [Page 4] ---
Page 4 of 14
Ord. No. 0632-21
c) Cockpit Site and Construction - Cockpits shall be constructed and operated within the appropriate areas as prescribed in the Zoning Ordinance. In the absence of such Ordinance, the Sangguniang Panlungsod shall enact an ordinance that no cockpits shall be constructed within or near existing residential or commercial areas, hospitals, school buildings, churches, other public buildings. Any application for issuance of building permit for the construction of cockpit shall be made in accordance with the Building Code and the Zoning Ordinance of the city.
d) Licensing of Cockpits - Subject to the provisions of Book II of Republic Act No. 7160, the Sangguniang Panlungsod shall enact an ordinance authorizing the issuance of License to operate cockpits in the City of Davao pursuant to the provisions of Article 99, (a), (3) paragraph (v) of Administrative Order No. 270, Prescribing the Implementing Rules and Regulations of the Local Government Code of 1991.
e) Requirements for Licensing of Cockpits - The following requirements must be fully applied with before the issuance of licenses:
1) New License - Every application for new license to operate or maintain a cockpit shall be accompanied with the following:
a) The location and vicinity plan of the cockpit.
b) The cockpit building plan/design as approved by the City Engineer, and a Certification by him to the effect that the cockpit was constructed in accordance with such approved plan/design.
c) A certification by the Zoning Administrator to the effect that the cockpit building was constructed in the area allowed by the Zoning Ordinance, and that it is not within a radius of 200 linear meters from any existing residential or commercial areas, hospitals, school buildings, churches, or other public buildings.
d) Official Receipts showing payment of City taxes, fees, and other levies prescribed by Ordinance No. 230, s. 1991, as amended, and other ordinances that may hereafter be promulgated by the Sangguniang Panlungsod.
e) Sanitary Permit/Clearance.
2) Annual Renewal - Every application for the annual renewal of a license to operate or manage a cockpit shall be submitted not later than the last working day of December of each year, and shall be accompanied with the following:
a) Official Receipts showing payment of City taxes, fees, and other levies as prescribed in Ordinance No. 230, and other ordinances that may hereafter be promulgated by the Sangguniang Panlungsod.
b) In case the cockpit was constructed more than ten (10) years before the date of renewal application, Certification from the City Engineer to the effect that such cockpit is free from material, structural or other physical hazards.

--- [Page 5] ---
Page 5 of 14
Ord. No. 0632-21

f) Registration of Cockfights - All cockfights in Davao City shall register with the Office of the City Mayor, through the Business Bureau. No cockfight shall be allowed to operate without proper registration certificate being secured not later than January 20 annually.

g) Registration Certificate - In order to secure a Registration Certificate, the applicant shall submit the following documents:

1. An application stating therein the name of the cockfight
2. A copy of the location and vicinity plan of the cockfight
3. A copy of the cockfight building plan/design
4. A certified copy of the Mayor's Permit/License
5. A copy of the Sanitary Permit/Clearance
6. A photocopy/copies of official receipts of payments
7. Two perspective photographs of the cockfight, and
8. A list of all duly licensed personnel and copy of their respective licenses.

h) Holding of Cockfights - Except as provided in this Ordinance, cockfighting shall be allowed only in licensed cockfights, during Sundays and Legal Holidays, and during local fiestas, for not more than three (3) days. It may also be held during elections, referendums, or expositions, for a similar period of three (3) days upon resolution of the Sangguniang Panlungsod; Provided that no cockfighting shall be held on December 30 (Rizal Day), June 12 (Philippine Independence Day), November 30 (National Heroes Day), Holy Thursday, Good Friday, Election and Referendum Day and during Registration Day for such election or referendum.

i) Cockfighting for Entertainment of Tourists or for Charitable Purposes - Subject to the preceding subsection hereof, the City Mayor may also allow the holding of cockfighting for the entertainment of foreign dignitaries or for returning Filipinos, commonly known as "Balikbayan," or for the support of national or city fund-raising campaigns for charitable purposes, as may be authorized by the President or the Sangguniang Panlungsod, upon the latter's resolution, in licensed cockfights; Provided that this privilege shall be extended for only one (1) time, for a period not exceeding three (3) days, within a year in the City or in each of the political districts.

j) Other Games During Prescribed Cockfights - No gambling of any kind shall be permitted on the premises of the cockfight or place of cockfighting during cockfights. The owner, manager, or lessees of such cockfight and the violators of this injunction shall be criminally liable under Section 12 hereof.

k) Special Permits:
1. Special permits can be issued only under the circumstances enumerated in sub-paragraphs (h) and (i) above. Provided, that derbies and cockfighting covered by these permits shall be held only on days other than Sundays and Legal Holidays.
2. No special cockfights shall be allowed unless authorized by the Sangguniang Panlungsod through an approved resolution at least 30 days before the event.

--- [Page 6] ---
Page 6 of 14
Ord. No. 0632-21
3. Every application shall be signed by the owner/operator or licensee of the cockpit where such special cockfights are to be held, and countersigned by the promoter or a representative of the beneficiary, to be supported with the necessary documents, as follows:
a) A copy of Presidential or Mayor's proclamation authorizing the fund-raising campaign;
b) Letter request of the beneficiary to the cockpit owner, operator, or licensee to stage special cockfights in a particular cockpit;
c) Resolution of the Sangguniang Panlungsod during official town fiestas and agricultural, industrial or commercial fairs, carnivals or expositions;
d) Resolution of the Sangguniang Panlungsod for the support of national fund-raising campaigns for charitable or other purposes as may be authorized by the Office of the President or the City Mayor.
4. No international cockfight derby may be held without an approved resolution by the Sangguniang Panlungsod authorizing the same for the promotion of not more than eight (8) international cockfight derbies every year in Davao City, for the support of national fund-raising campaigns as may be authorized by the Office of the President, upon application of duly qualified promoters and countersigned by the owner/operator or licensee of the cockpit. Such application shall be filed at least sixty (60) days before the scheduled international cockfight derby. In all these cases, the above requirements are necessary.
5. Every application for an international cockfight derby shall be supported with the following documents:
a) A copy of Proclamation authorizing the fund raising campaign;
b) Letter request from the beneficiary for the holding of an international derby in a particular cockpit;
c) A list of expected foreign and local participants.
I) Prohibition Against Persons - No person less than fifteen (15) years of age shall be allowed inside the premises of the cockpit during cockfight. The operator, manager, or licensee shall be responsible for the strict compliance of this rule.
SECTION 3A- RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR ELECTRONIC SARONG:
a) APPLICABILITY - These provisions shall apply to local cockpit operators having an option to conduct cockfighting events through electronic means where cockfighting enthusiasts may participate.

--- [Page 7] ---
Page 7 of 14
Ord. No. 0632-21

b) NATURE AND TERM OF FRANCHISE OF THE E-Sabong
Subject to the provisions of applicable laws, rules and regulations, a Franchisee may broadcast live and data stream cockfighting activities and derives at the appropriate designated establishments within the City of Davao, provided that the cockfighting subject to broadcast shall only be done in a licensed cockpit, including the acceptance of bets through electronic means within the territorial jurisdiction of Davao City;

The appropriate designated establishments where the grantee intends to broadcast and live stream cockfighting activities and to establish, operate and maintain off-site cockpit betting stations shall be located and operated only within appropriate areas as prescribed by zoning laws and applicable ordinances. No establishment shall be operated and maintained within the radius of two hundred (200) lineal meters from any existing school buildings, churches and public buildings. Further, the owners of the said commercial establishments shall take measures to prevent minors from viewing the said cockfighting activities.

c) AUTHORITY OF THE OFFICE OF THE CITY MAYOR
The Grantee shall apply and secure the required business permit to operate from the Office of the Mayor and the latter shall have authority to require compliance of all existing laws, ordinances, rules and regulations similarly imposed to all business establishments and impose conditions thereto as are expressly or implicitly necessary for the protection of the welfare and safety of all persons going or transacting in said commercial establishments, then, the Grantee shall get an endorsement from the City Mayor's Office for a Resolution of No Objection from the City Council.

d) PROHIBITION OF SALE, LEASE, USUFRUCT AND TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE
An electronic sabong franchise is non-transferable in character. As such, the Grantee shall not sell, assign, lease, grant the usufruct of, or transfer its franchise, including rights and privileges acquired thereunder to any person, natural or juridical, firm or other entities, nor merge with any corporation or individual without prior notice and approval of the Sangguniang Panlungsod.

e) MANDATORY PAYMENT OF TAXES AND FEES PROVISIONS
The Grantee shall be liable to pay all taxes and other fees prescribed by the City of Davao. The assessment shall be without prejudice to the subsequent imposition as may be adopted or hereafter required by law or ordinance. Failure on the part of the grantee to timely and regularly comply with said tax obligations shall be a ground for the automatic revocation or cancellation of its franchise;

--- [Page 8] ---
Page 8 of 14
Ord. No. 0532-21
f.) FRANCHISE TAX. - There is hereby imposed a franchise tax as provided for in Article V, Section 41 of Ordinance No. 0291-17, Series of 2017, consisting of 87% of 1% of the gross receipts derived by the franchisee from the plasda made through electronic means, within Davao City, or the amount of One Hundred Thousand Pesos (PhP100,000.00) per event, per day, whichever is higher.
g.) AMUSEMENT TAX. - There is hereby levied a tax to be collected from the operator of the local cockpit where the cockfighting activity is actually conducted, or in appropriate designated areas where such fights are broadcasted at a rate of 20% of the gross receipts from admission fees. Further, an amusement tax will be collected from the franchisee of the actual cockfighting being broadcasted in an e-sabong system in the amount of Three Hundred Fifty Pesos (PhP 350.00) per suktada.
h.) OBLIGATION OF THE FRANCHISEE. - The franchisee must regularly furnish the City Mayor or his duly authorized representative, an updated list of all its authorized agents/ coordinators acting in furtherance of their operations and all accounts they are using in receiving bets from its players. They shall likewise ensure that all account funding and withdrawal shall be done only through legitimate channels, such as over-the-counter and online banking, e-Wallet systems, and through other legitimate money transfer services. Further, the franchisee must also ensure that all its authorized agents must secure their own corresponding Mayor's Permit to operate, and that no agent shall be allowed to commence operation without the necessary permit.
i.) TIME AND PLACE OF PAYMENT. - The franchise tax shall be paid to the City Treasurer's Office once within the first twenty (20) days of January, or in quarterly installments within the first twenty days of January, April and October of each year. Further, the amusement tax herein imposed shall be due and payable to the City Treasurer's Office within the first ten (10) days of the month following that for which they are due.
j.) OTHER GAMBLING ACTIVITIES. - All gambling games of any kind shall at any time be hereby prohibited at the premises of the off-site business operation. The managers or lessee/s of such off-site business and the violators of this provision shall be prosecuted and held criminally liable under the provisions of existing laws.

--- [Page 9] ---
Page 9 of 14
Ord. No. 0632-21

k.) ANTI-FRAUD MEASURES.- The Office of the City Mayor shall adopt such measures to prevent the use of fraudulent means or manipulation in all aspects of cockfighting. Persons employing fraudulent means or manipulation shall be prosecuted in accordance with penal laws as may be warranted by the prevailing circumstances. Any breach and/or circumvention of any of the conditions set in this Ordinance shall be a cause for the suspension or revocation of the issued e-Sabong Gaming License.

I.) HOLDING OF COCKFIGHTS.- Cockfighting shall be broadcasted from Mondays to Sundays and legal holidays and during local fiestas. It may also be held during city agricultural, commercial, or industrial fair, carnival or exposition for a similar period of three days upon resolution of the Sangguniang Panlungsod. Provided, that no cockfighting shall be held on December 30, (Rizal Day), June 12 (Philippine Independence Day), November 30 (National Heroes Day), Holy Thursday, Good Friday, Election or Referendum Day and during Registration Days for such election or referendum.

m.) COCKFIGHTING FOR ENTERTAINMENT OF TOURISTS OR FOR CHARITABLE PURPOSES - Subject to the preceding subsection hereof, the City Mayor may also allow the holding of cockfighting for the entertainment of foreign dignitaries or for tourists, or for returning Filipinos, commonly known as "Balikbayan," or for the support of national fund-raising campaigns for charitable purposes as may be authorized by the Office of the President or the Sangguniang Panlungsod, in licensed cockpits or in playgrounds or parks. Provided, that this privilege shall be extended for only one time, for a period not exceeding three days, within a year in the City or in each of the political districts.

n.) IT DEVELOPMENT - The franchisee must coordinate with the City Information Technology Center and create measures wherein the taxes will be automatically collected and paid upon the placement of the bet of the online better.

SECTION 4. REGISTRATION OF BREEDERS - All breeders of gamefowl are required to register with the City Agriculturist's Office. The City Agriculturist shall furnish the Office of the City Mayor, copy furnished the Sangguniang Panlungsod, with a complete record of duly registered breeders.

SECTION 5. LICENSE FEES FOR COCKPITS - For this purpose, the annual taxes shall be collected by the City Treasurer, as follows:

a) In the Poblacion, Talomo, Agdao and Buhangin
Buhangin
Toril, Tugbo, Calinan and Bunawan
In other Districts
P 5,000.00
2,000.00
1,000.00

--- [Page 10] ---
Page 10 of 14
Ord. No. 0632-21

SECTION 6. AMUSEMENTS TAX ON ADMISSION

a) Imposition of Tax - There is being levied and imposed upon the
proprietor, lessee operator or promoter of cockpits that charge
admission or entrance fees within the territorial jurisdiction of the City
of Davao, a tax on admission fee in addition to the taxes and fees
imposed under Sections 5 and 9 hereof.

b) Exemption - The tax herein imposed do not apply in the following
cases, provided that exemption should first be obtained for this
purpose through an approved resolution of the Sangguniang
Pambansang Pambansod, upon recommendation of the City Treasurer:
1. Where the admission fees are collected for and in behalf of
charitable, educational or religious associations who are declared by law or presidential proclamation as exempted from the payment
of amusement tax, provided, further, that such exhibition show
performance and the like shall be limited to only three (3) days in a
calendar year.
2. Provided, further, that said exemptions shall be applicable only to
the share of the sponsoring exempt institutions or organizations as
aforementioned. However, the remaining proceeds, including those
accruing to the promoter, shall be subject to the payment of
amusement tax in accordance with the above rates.
The City Treasurer shall promulgate rules and regulations necessary for the effective implementation of the provision of paragraph (b) of this Section, subject to the approval by the City
Mayor.

c) Time of Payment - The taxes herein imposed shall be collected as
part and not in addition to the price of admission tickets at the time
patrons or customers are admitted to the amusement places or
establishments.

The taxes herein above imposed shall be due and payable within the
first five (5) days of the month next following that for which they are
due, by the proprietor, lessee, operator and promoter, and such taxes
to be determined on the basis of a true and complete return of the
amount of gross receipts derived during the preceding month. If the
tax is not paid within the time fixed above, the taxpayer shall be
subject to such surcharges, interest and penalties prescribed by this
Ordinance.

d) Administrative Provisions.

1. Remittance of Tax Surcharge for late remittance - The
proprietor, lessee, operator, or promoter of cockpits shall withhold
the amusements tax on admission.

--- [Page 11] ---
Page 11 of 14
Ord. No. 0632-21

The amusement tax withheld shall be remitted to the City
Treasurer within the first five (5) days of the month. The
proprietor, lessee, operator, or promoter concerned shall make a
complete return of the gross receipts derived during the preceding
month which shall be the basis for determining the tax due.

Failure to pay the tax within the time fixed herein above shall
render those concerned liable to a surcharge of twenty-five percent
(25%) of the original amount plus an interest at the rate of
fourteen percent (14%) per annum on the amount until the same is fully paid. In case of willful neglect to file the return and
pay the tax within the time required, or fraudulent return or a false
return is willfully made, the taxpayer shall be subject to surcharge
of fifty percent (50%) of the correct tax due plus fourteen percent
(14%) interest per annum from due date until the same is fully paid.

2. Ticket used as basis in paying the tax - Tickets will be used
for collecting the amusement tax imposed in this Section.
Operators of cockpits shall keep a notice in big legible letters
or numbers posted in a conspicuous place in front of the ticket booths
showing the total admission price, which will include as part thereof
the city amusement taxes corresponding to each or kind of ticket.

3. Form of tickets, their registration - Every proprietor, lessee
operator or promoter of cockpit shall provide tickets which shall be
serially numbered, indicating therein the name of the amusement
place and the fee subject for admission. All tickets to be used
whether regular, special, or ceremonial shall bear the employee's
patent shall be presented to the Office of the City Treasurer for registration.
Whenever there is a change in the admission fee after registration,
a notice to that effect shall be registered with the City Treasurer
and be conspicuously posted in a place of business for the
information of the public. Tickets presented at the gate or entrance
shall be cut into three parts, the 1st part shall be returned to the
customer, the 2nd part to be retained by the management, and the
3rd part shall be dropped in the CTO drop box, supplied by the City
Treasurer. The three (3) parts of the ticket shall bear the same number.
Sub-numbering of such tickets is strictly prohibited and the use of slugs and other substitutes for the admission tickets are strictly prohibited.

4. Verification and Inspection of Cockpits - The City Treasurer
shall post an employee at the gate of cockpits for the purpose of
verifying all tickets being sold thereat.

e) Applicability Clause - All other matters relating to the operation of
amusement places or establishments shall be governed by pertinent
laws, rules and regulations.

--- [Page 12] ---
Page 12 of 14
Ord. No. 0632-21

SECTION 7. COCKFIGHTING OFFICIALS - The following cockfighting officials are required to register with the Business Bureau, City Mayor's Office.
1. Promoters
2. Cockpit Managers
3. Referees (Sentenciadores)
4. Bet-Takers (Kristos)
5. Bet- Manager (Kasadors)
6. Gaffers (Mananaris)

SECTION 8. LICENSING OF COCKFIGHTING OFFICIALS - Promoters, cockpit managers, referees, bet-takers, bet-managers, or gaffers shall not act as such in any authorized cockfighting without first securing a license renewable every year on their birthmonths from the City Mayor and the corresponding taxes, fees, and charges paid to the City Treasurer, in accordance with this Ordinance. Only licensed cockfighting officials shall officiate in all kinds of cockfighting authorized in this Ordinance.

SECTION 9. FEES - In addition to the taxes, fees, and other levies imposed by the City, under Sections 5 and 6 hereof, the following fees shall be paid to the City Treasurer, pursuant to the provisions of the Local Government Code (R.A. No. 7160) before any operation or activity can be conducted.

COCKPIT AND COCKFIGHTING FEES AND CHARGES
1. Application Filing fee P 20.00

2. For cockpit registration (annually)
a) Cockpit located:
1) In the poblacion (Dist. 1) 750.00
2) Other places 500.00
b) Ocular Inspection fee 300.00

3. For registration of cockpit personnel (Annually):
a) Operator, general manager, promoter, host, or such other terms applied to persons promoting or hosting a cockfight 200.00
b) Cockpit Manager 100.00
c) Referee (Sentenciador) 100.00
d) Cashier 100.00
e) Bet-Manager (Maciador/Kasador) 100.00
f) Derby Matchmaker 100.00
g) Bet-Taker (Kristo) 50.00
h) Gaffer (Mananari) 50.00

--- [Page 13] ---
Page 13 of 14
Ord. No. 0632-21
4. Special Permit Fees:
a) International Derby
5,000.00
b) Special Cockfights (Pintakasi)
1,000.00
5. Fee for Promoter of each Derby:
a) 2-cock derby
250.00
b) 3-cock derby
500.00
c) 4-cock derby
750.00
d) 5-cock derby
1,000.00
6. For Special Derby Assessment:
a) For every winning cock
50.00
7. Filing fee for all complaints, petitions and/or applications for proper equitable reliefs provided for in this Code
500.00
SECTION 10. ANTI-TRAUD MEASURES - All persons involved in cockfightings and in the operation of cockpits, including, among others, the owner or operator of cockpits, the cockpit officials, the cockers (aficionados), and government officers involved in the issuance of permits or licenses and the inspection of cockpits, must observe utmost honesty, fair play, good faith, and peace and order.
SECTION 11. COMPLAINTS AND PROTESTS - The City Legal Officer shall take cognizance of complaints and protests relative to the operation and management of cockpits or the conduct of cockfights, and violations of this Ordinance, which complaints and protests must be in writing and under oath. The City Legal Office shall prescribe the rules and procedures governing such cases, subject to the approval of the City Mayor.
SECTION 12. SUPPLEMENTARY RULES - In all cases not covered herein, the Rules and Regulations of the Philippine Gamefowl Commission, adopted on June 1, 1981, the provisions of P.D. 1802 and other amendments affecting cockpits, cockfighting, and cockpit personnel, and P.D. 449 (Cockfighting Law of 1974) as amended, shall govern.
SECTION 13. PENAL CLAUSE - Any violation of this Ordinance shall be penalized by a fine not exceeding the amount of P 2,000.00, or an imprisonment of not more than one (1) year or both at the discretion of the Court, and the violator's cock, hens and eggs, and all bets involved in the unlawful activity shall be confiscated in favor of the City Government, turned over to the City Agriculturist and shall be disposed of by the City Mayor in the manner provided by law, rules and regulations.
SECTION 14. REPEALING CLAUSE - Sub-paragraph 21 (a to c), paragraph H, Article 6, Chapter IV of Ordinance No. 230, S. 1991, as amended, and all ordinances, rules and regulations which are inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

--- [Page 14] ---
Page 14 of 14
Ord. No. 0632-21
SECTION 15. SEPARABILITY CLAUSE - A juridical declaration that a part of
this Ordinance is unlawful shall not affect the others.
SECTION 16. EFFECTIVITY - This Ordinance shall commence to take effect
upon approval and after the required publication in a newspaper of general circulation.
ENACTED, on the 6th day of July 2021, by a majority vote of all the Members of
the Sanggunian, there being a quorum.
CERTIFIED CORRECT:
CHARITO N. SANTOS
Secretary to the Sanggunian Panlungsod
(City Government Department Head II)
ATTESTED:
EDGAR P. TIBUAN JR.
President Pro Tempore
Temporary Presiding Officer
cns/ray
APPROVED: AUG 24 2021, 2021
SARA Z. DUTERTE
City Mayor
ATTESTED:
ATTY. JULIEKA TOLOPEZ
City Administrator
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE PROVISIONS OF ORDINANCE NO. 5903 (COCKFIGHTING ORDINANCE OF DAVAO CITY), SERIES OF 1997, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE NEW COCKFIGHTING CODE OF DAVAO CITY TO INCLUDE E-
SABONG AS A MODE OF BETTING, AND AMUSEMENT FOR LOCAL COCKFIGHTING AFICIONADOS
