=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance no. 000458-18 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
Republic of the Philippines
Office of the Sangguniang Panlungsod
City of Davao

18th City Council
50th Regular Session
Series of 2018

PRESENT:
Councillor Victorio U. Advincula Jr.
Councillor Nilo M. Abellera Jr.
Councillor Maria Belen S. Acosta
Councillor Al Ryan S. Alejandre
Councillor Dante L. Apostol Sr.
Councillor Maria J. Bautista
Councillor Joanne M. Bonguyan-Quijos
Councillor Ma. Cherry Ann M. Bonguyan
Councillor Pilcar P. Braga
Councillor Carmelo J. Clarion
Councillor Jimmy G. Dureza
Councillor Edgar N. Ibizyuan Jr.
Councillor Maria L. Lapique-Yap
Councillor Rene Elias C. Lopez
Councillor Diosdado Angelo A. Mahipus Sr.
Councillor Bonifacio E. Militar
Councillor Avegayle Dalodo Ortiz
Councillor Antoinette G. Principe - Castrodes
Councillor J. Melchor B. Quitan Jr.
Councillor Jesus Joseph P. Zozobra III

OFFICIAL BUSINESS:
Vice Mayor Bernard E. Al-ag
Councillor Danilo C. Dayanghirang
Councillor April Marie C. Dayap
- Acting City Mayor
- Attended the Philippine Councillors League in Legaspi City
- Attended the National Movement for Young Legislators (NMYL) 87th Board Meeting in Legaspi City

ABSENT:
Councillor January N. Duterte
Councillor Marissa P. Salvador-Abella
Councillor Mary Joselle D. Villafuerte
- On Domestic Emergency Leave
- On Vacation Leave
- On Domestic Emergency Leave

ORDINANCE NO. 0458-18
Series of 2018

AN ORDINANCE PENALIZING THE SNEAKING IN, USING AND CARRYING OF ANY FORMS OF PROHIBITED ITEMS INSIDE JAIL AND DETENTION CENTERS IN THE CITY OF DAVAO

--- [Page 2] ---
Page 2 of 8
Ord. No. 0458-18

Be it ordained by the Sangguniang Panlungsod of Davao City in session assembled that:

SECTION 1. SCOPE - This Ordinance shall cover all jails and detention centers situated within the jurisdiction of the City of Davao and such other confinements as the court may direct to place the inmates or patients for their confinement.

SECTION 2. DECLARATION OF POLICY: The provisions of this Ordinance, in consonance with the City Government's commitment for good governance and maintaining public order and safety, hereby declares this policy to strengthen the implementation of security measures imposed by the Bureau of Jail Management and Penology (BJMP), the Philippine National Police (PNP), Rehabilitation Centers, and other Law Enforcement Agencies. For this purpose, the City of Davao adheres to the following measures:

a) To prevent the occurrence of deaths, riots, hostage taking and escape of inmates or patients by prohibiting the possession and entry of deadly and bladed weapons;
b) To prevent the inmates or patients from coercing, intimidating, threatening complainants and witnesses or other forms of retaliation, orchestrate crimes and organize rescue plan by prohibiting the possession and entry of cellular phones and other electronic gadgets;
c) To prevent the inmates or patients from bringing jail or detention center personnel into the jail or detention center by prohibiting the possession of excessive amount of money in cash or check inside jails or detention centers;
d) To safeguard public health and well-being of the inmates or patients by penalizing the possession and entry of illegal drugs, alcoholic substances, cigarettes and tobacco;
e) To promote public welfare in the community by ensuring the rehabilitation and development of inmates or patients in preparation for their eventual reintegration into the society upon release.

SECTION 3. DEFINITION OF TERMS - As used in this Ordinance, the following shall be construed to mean as follows:

a) Prohibited Items - any article or thing forbidden by law and/or by jail and detention center rules that pose as security hazards or endanger the lives of inmates, patients, visitors or personnel. Under this Ordinance, the following are considered prohibited items:

i. Dangerous drugs and paraphernalia;
ii. Deadly and bladed weapons;
iii. Firearms and ammunition, explosives or any part thereof, ammunition, improvised explosive devices and any possible components, such as electric wires, batteries, fertilizers, etc.;
iv. Metal cutting saw or blades and digging tools not permitted by the jail management;
v. Cigarette and other tobacco products, including e-cigarettes and the like;
vi. Liquor, beer, coconut wine and other alcoholic substances;
vii. Cash worth more than the prescribed allowable amount, including checks, or other commodities of exchange such as jewelry, appliances and gadgets;
viii. Mobile phones and other electronic devices;

--- [Page 3] ---
Page 3 of 8
Ord. No. 0458-18

ix. Pornographic materials and gadgets;
x. Gambling paraphernalia; and
xi. Other items or products that may be prescribed as prohibited by law;

b) Dangerous Drugs and Paraphernalia – any dangerous drugs and paraphernalia defined under Republic Act No. 9165, or the "Comprehensive Dangerous Drugs Act of 2002" and its Implementing Rules and Regulations;
c) Bladed Weapons – include pointed or blunt weapons such as "knife," "spear," "pana," "daggar," "bolo," "barong," "kris," or "chako," except where such articles are being used as necessary tools or implements to earn a livelihood or in pursuit of a lawful activity as defined under Presidential Decree No. 9, as amended by Batas Pambansa Blg. 6;
d) Deadly Weapons – include hand grenades, rife grenades and other explosives as defined under Presidential Decree No. 9;
e) Firearm – refers to any handheld or portable weapon, whether a small arm or light weapon, that expels or is designed to expel a bullet, shot, slug, missile or any projectile, which is discharged by means of expansive force of gases from burning gunpowder or other form of combustion or any similar instrument or implement, provided that such weapon is considered a firearm as defined under Section (I) of Republic Act No. 10591;
f) Ammunition – refers to a complete unfixed unit consisting of a bullet, gunpowder, cartridge case and primer or loaded shell for use in any firearm defined under Section 3(b) of Republic Act No. 10591;
g) Improvised Explosive Device – refers to a tool or instrument of any explosive or incendiary device, whether chemical, mechanical, electronic, electrical or otherwise used or intended to be used by that person for its manufacture, construction, assembly, delivery or detonation, where the explosive or incendiary device is capable or is intended to be made capable of producing destructive effect on contiguous objects or causing injury or death to any person as defined under Republic Act No. 9516;
h) Tobacco Products and E-cigarettes – items such as cigars, cigarettes, smokeless tobacco or any snuff or chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco and roll-your-own tobacco; including vape and electronic devices that do not burn or use tobacco leaves but instead vaporize a solution the user then inhales which stimulate the experience of smoking tobacco;
i) Alcoholic Beverage – refers to any fermented liquor, such as wine, beer, or distilled spirit, that contains ethyl alcohol or ethanol as an intoxicating agent;
j) Excessive Cash – monetary equivalent is more than the prescribed allowable amount in the possession of an inmate or patient, subject to the standard policy of the jail or detention center;
k) Mobile Phone – any device that can make and receive telephone calls/communications, text messaging, MMS, email, internet access and short range wireless communications (Infrared or Bluetooth) by connecting to cellular networks, allowing access to public telephone networks;

--- [Page 4] ---
Page 4 of 8.
Ord. No. 0458-18

I) Electronic Devices - include any computer, laptop/netbook, ipad/tablet, personal digital assistant, digital camera or camcorder, two-way radio, or other similar devices;

m) Pornographic Materials and Gadgets - refer to any electronic or manual gadgets or devices used to stimulate sexual pleasures, including videos, images and publications (either in printed or digital form) focusing on intimate body parts either directly or implicitly, making it sexually explicit and contrary to public policy, public order, good character, moral standards, and those defined under Section 3(h) of Republic Act No. 9288;

n) Gambling Paraphernalia - refers to any equipment or item used for the game of cockfighting, jueteng, bookies (jai-alai or horse racing, to include game fixing) and other lotteries, such as craps, dice, poker, roulette, and other card games; pach que, domino, mahjong, high and low, roulette, pinball and other mechanical inventories or devices; seven-eleven dice games and the like;

o) Jail and Detention Center - refers to a place of confinement for persons under arrest or deprived of liberty, awaiting trial for the filing of formal charges in court or serving sentence. This term also includes rehabilitation centers, lock-ups, hospitals (in the case of hospital arrests, confinement or check-ups) and other places determined by the court to be the place of the detainee, prisoner or patient's confinement.

p) Inmate - the generic term used to refer to a detainee or prisoner;

q) Detainee - a person who is accused before the court or competent authority and is temporarily confined in jail while undergoing or awaiting investigation, trial, or final judgment;

r) Prisoner - an inmate convicted by final judgment;

s) Patient or Resident - refers to a person with impairment that may be physical, mental, emotional or a combination of these ordered by the court or competent authority to remain in lock-up, hospital or rehabilitation center for their care or confinement;

t) Sneaking In - the act of bringing, taking in, carrying, using or possessing, in a secretive, furtive or deceitful manner any items which may be considered as prohibited items within the meaning of this Ordinance, without the knowledge or authorization of the management of the jail or detention center;

u) Search - consists of physical search including, but not limited to, inspection of all items being carried, the emptying of pockets, pat/frisk search, rub search, strip search, visual body search, etc., as may be deemed necessary by the jail or detention center;

v) Pat/ Frisk Search - a search wherein the officer pats or squeezes the subject's clothing to attempt to detect prohibited items. For same gender searches, the pat/frisk search is normally accomplished in concert with Rub Search;

--- [Page 5] ---
Page 5 of 8
Ord. No. 0458-18
w) Rub Search - a search wherein the officer rubs and/or pats the subject's body over the clothing, but in a more intense and thorough manner. In a rub search, the genital, the buttocks, and breast (of females) areas are carefully rubbed - areas which are not searched in a pat/frisk search. Further, it shall not be conducted on cross-gender individuals;
x) Strip Search - a search which involves the visual inspection of disrobed or partially disrobed subject;
y) Visual Body Search - a search which involves the inspection of the anus and/or vaginal area, generally requiring the subject to bend over and spread the cheeks of the buttocks; to squat and/or otherwise expose the body cavity orifices;
z) Possession - is the control a person intentionally exercises toward a thing, or the manual or ideal custody of anything, which may be the subject of property, for one's use and enjoyment;
aa) Personnel - refers to officers, warden, wardress, staff or other persons employed in jails and detention centers;
bb) Service Provider - refers to any person, office, agency or group providing jail or detention centers with welfare services such as health, education, livelihood assistance, legal aid, etc.;
cc) Visitor - a person who enters a jail facility for a definite period of time to meet an inmate or personnel of EJP or conduct an official business or activity inside the jail. It includes immediate family, relative, friend, lawyer, doctor, spiritual adviser, journalist/reporter, service provider or any person who enters the jail or detention center for the purpose of seeing or confering with an inmate;
dd) Minor - a person below the age of legal majority - eighteen (18) years of age.
SECTION 4. PROHIBITED ACTS - The following are considered prohibited acts:
a) Possession of Prohibited Drugs
In conformity with Republic Act No. 9165, or the "Comprehensive Dangerous Drugs Act," no person shall possess or use any of the prohibited drugs upon entering and/or while inside the jail and detention center.
b) Possession of Deadly and Bladed Weapons
No person shall possess deadly and bladed weapons upon entering and/or while inside the jail and detention center, in relation to Presidential Decree No. 9, as amended by Batas Pambansa Blg. 6.
c) Possession of Firearms and Ammunition
No person shall possess firearms, its accessories, and ammunition upon entering and/or while inside the jail and detention center, in relation to Republic Act No. 10591.
d) Possession of Improvised Explosive Devices
No person shall possess improvised explosive devices and its components upon entering and/or while inside the jail and detention center, in relation to

--- [Page 6] ---
Page 6 of 8
Ord. No. 0458-18

e) Possession of other Prohibited Items
All persons, including but not limited to, inmates, detainees, prisoners, patients, visitors, jail and detention center personnel, and service providers are forbidden to sneak in, use or carry any prohibited item as enumerated and defined in Section (3A) hereof into the jail or detention center, without proper authorization from the heads of the jail or detention center.

Any prohibited item found in the possession of a person or any of his/her belongings, during the search prior to entry and/or while inside the jail or detention center, after notice that the said items must be surrendered, shall be presumed willfully possessed.

SECTION 5. EXEMPTIONS - Service providers or visitors in their official capacity shall be allowed to bring in items and gadgets which may be prohibited items necessary in the performance of their functions, provided they should first secure an authorization from the head of the jail or detention center prior to entry.

In no case shall dangerous drugs and paraphernalia be allowed in the jail or detention center except those provided for the treatment or rehabilitation of patients or residents in authorized establishments or those brought in by the Philippine Drug Enforcement Agency (PDEA) for educational purpose.

SECTION 6. PENALTY - Any violation of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be meted with the following penalties:
a) Violation of Section (4a) shall be proceeded against, in accordance with the provisions of R.A. 9165, otherwise known as the "Comprehensive Dangerous Drugs Act of 2002".
b) Violation of Section (4b) shall be proceeded against, in accordance with the provisions of P.D. 9, as amended by B.P. 6; while R.A. 1780 will cover the concealment, display, and bladed weapons.
c) Violation of Section (4c) shall be proceeded against, in accordance with the provisions of R.A. 10591.
d) Violation of Section (4d) shall be proceeded against, in accordance with the provisions of R.A. 9516.
e) Violation of Section (4e) shall be penalized accordingly, via:

1) Minors - minors found in violation of this Ordinance shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of R.A. 9344, as amended by R.A. 10630, or the "Juvenile Justice and Welfare Act of 2006".

Provided that the use of minors by any person in the commission of any offense punishable under this Ordinance shall constitute an aggravating circumstance which shall be penalized at the maximum degree.

2) Private Persons
i) First Offense - Fine of Five Thousand Pesos (P5,000.00), confiscation of prohibited item and/or banning entry in the facility for six(6) months;
ii) Second Offense - Fine of Five Thousand Pesos (P5,000.00), forfeiture of the confiscated prohibited item and/or banning entry in the facility for nine(9) months;
iii) Third Offense - Fine of Five Thousand Pesos (P5,000.00), forfeiture of the confiscated prohibited item, and/or banning entry in the facility for twelve (12) months.

--- [Page 7] ---
Page 7 of 8
Ord. No. 0458-18

Provided, that the reentry in the facility shall commence only after the service of sentence, payment of fines and lapse of the prescribed ban period in accordance with Section 4(b) Paragraph 2 of Republic Act No. 7438.

3) Personnel of Jail and Detention Center
i) First Offense - Fine of Five Thousand Pesos (P5,000.00), forfeiture of the confiscated prohibited item and/or imprisonment for six (6) months;
ii) Second Offense - Fine of Five Thousand Pesos (P5,000.00), forfeiture of the confiscated prohibited item and/or imprisonment for nine (9) months; and,
iii) Third Offense - Fine of Five Thousand Pesos (P5,000.00), forfeiture of the confiscated prohibited item and/or imprisonment for twelve (12) months.

Provided, such fine or penalty, or both, shall be imposed at the discretion of the court as mandated by Republic Act No. 7160, or the "Local Government Code of 1991."

Provided further, that the penalties imposed herein, shall be without prejudice to the filing of further administrative and/or criminal actions against the erring personnel.

SECTION 7. CONFISCACTION AND FORFEITURE - The confiscated prohibited item shall be placed in the custody of the warden or his/her authorized representative for safekeeping and shall be forfeited in favor of the government through the appropriate agency.

SECTION 8. POSTING OF NOTICE - All jails and detention centers are mandated to post a notice in a public and conspicuous place prior to any search and entry, the items defined in this Ordinance as prohibited items and the penalties anchored for such violation.

SECTION 9. SEPARABILITY CLAUSE - If, any part or provision of this Ordinance is declared unconstitutional or invalid, other sections or provisions hereof not so declared and not affected by such declaration shall remain in full force and effect.

SECTION 10. REPEALING CLAUSE - All ordinances, or any part thereof, which are contrary to or inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.

SECTION 11. EFFECTIVITY CLAUSE - This Ordinance shall take effect fifteen (15) days after its publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Davao and after posting in two conspicuous places in the City.

--- [Page 8] ---
Page 8 of 8
Ord. No. 0458-18

ENACTED, on the 29th day of May 2018, by a majority vote of all the Members
of the Sanggunian, there being a quorum.

CERTIFIED CORRECT:

CHARITO N. SANTOS
Secretary to the Sangguniang Panlungsod
(City Government Department Head II)

ATTESTED:
VICTORIO LLADINVICUA JR.
City Councilor
Temporary Presiding Officer

cns/fd

APPROVED: 21 JAN 2019, 2018

SARA Z. DUTERTE
City Mayor

ATTESTED:
ATTY. ZULEIKA T. LOPEZ
City Administrator