=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 0255-20 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
Republic of the Philippines
City of Davao
Office of the Sangguniang Panlungsod

19th City Council
14th Regular Session
Series of 2020

PRESENT:

Vice Mayor Sebastian Z. Duterte
Councillor Ralph O. Abella
Councillor Maria Belen S. Acosta
Councillor Bai Hundra Cassandra Dominique N. Advincula
Councillor Wilberto E. Al-ag
Councillor Dante L. Apostol Sr.
Councillor Conrado M. Baluran
Councillor Bernard M. Benguyen
Councillor Louie John J. Benguyen
Councillor Pilar C. Braga
Councillor Augusto Javier G. Campos III
Councillor Danilo C. Dayanghirang
Councillor Jonard C. Dayap
Councillor Edward J. Dela Cruz Jr.
Councillor Richlyn N. Justol-Bagulod
Councillor Pamela A. Librado-Morata
Councillor Diosdado Angelo Junior R. Mahipus
Councillor Myrna G. L'Dalado-Ortiz
Councillor Antoinette G. Principe-Castrodes
Councillor J. Melchor B. Quitlain Jr.
Councillor Alberto T. Unga
Councillor Manuel P. Villafuerte
Councillor Jesus Joseph P. Zozobra III

ABSENT:

Councillor Nilo D. Abellera
Councillor Edgar R. Ibyan Sr.
Councillor Jaffar U. Marohomalsic
Councillor Bonifacio E. Militar

ORDINANCE NO. 0255-20
Series of 2020

AN ORDINANCE PROHIBITING ANY FORM OF HARRASSMENT,
DISCRIMINATION, PREJUDICE OR INFLECTING ANY SHAME
OR HUMILIATION AGAINST FRONTLINE WORKERS,
SUSPECTED, PROBABLE AND CONFIRMED COVID CASES AND
CLOSE CONTACTS DURING AND AFTER THE STATE OF
NATIONAL HEALTH EMERGENCY AND IMPOSING PENALTIES

--- [Page 2] ---
Page 2 of 5  
Ord. No. 0255-20  

Be it ordained by the Honorable Sangguniang Panlungsod of Davao City, in session assembled, that:  

SECTION 1. TITLE: This Ordinance shall be known as "THE DAVAO CITY FRONTLINERS, PATIENTS AND CLOSE CONTACT PROTECTION ORDINANCE."  

SECTION 2. DEFINITION OF TERMS: The following terms used in this Ordinance shall mean:  

1. Frontline Workers or Frontliners - are defined as persons employed in, whether regular, casual, contractual, project based, job order, part-time, or other forms of employment, or exercising essential frontline functions, such as:  

a. Health workers, such as doctors, nurses, hospital or clinic aids, administrative staff, laboratory technicians, pharmacists and drug store employees;  

b. Employees of the national, local and barangay units tasked to work on the frontlines;  

c. Members of the AFP, PNP, PCC, BFP, and other law enforcement agencies;  

d. Employees of non-government organizations assisting in health, safety, disaster or emergency response such the Philippine Red Cross, World Health Organization, and the like;  

e. Employees of banks, bayad centers, money transfer services, cooperative and savings establishments, and the like;  

f. Employees of groceries, convenience stores, wet markets, and the like;  

g. Employees of food preparation, manufacturing and delivery services;  

h. Those operating public utility vehicles such as taxis, jeepsneys, and tricycles;  

i. Those working in essential private service sectors such as security guards, janitors, caretakers, funeral parlors, drivers of cargo vehicles and vehicles hired to transport other frontline workers, business process outsourcing or call centers, LPG and gas stations, water refilling stations, and the like;  

j. Mass media personnel.  

2. Patients - are defined as:  

a. Confirmed Case - any individual, irrespective of the presence or absence of clinical signs and symptoms, who was laboratory confirmed for COVID-19 in a test conducted at a DOH certified laboratory testing facility.  

b. Suspected Case - are those identified by DOH guidelines as falling under such classification;  

c. Probable Case - are those identified by DOH guidelines as falling under such classification.  

Provided, that any change in classification of the DOH of cases shall fall under the jurisdiction of the Sangguniang Panlungsod.

--- [Page 3] ---
Page 3 of 5
Ord. No. 0255-20

3. Close Contact – is a person without proper personal protective equipment who is providing direct care for a confirmed COVID-19 case, or a person who has direct physical contact, lived, worked, transacted or travelled in close proximity (less than 1 meter) for more than 15 minutes with a confirmed COVID-19 case, provided that any change by DOH of this definition shall be adopted automatically under this Ordinance.

SECTION 3. PROHIBITED ACTS

A. No person, natural or juridical shall be allowed to:

1. Discriminate against, or hiring, engaging, influencing others to discriminate against frontliners, patients or close contacts or analogous circumstances:

a. Dishonoring existing contractual obligations such as lease contracts, including the refusal to allow entry into such leased premises, solely by reason of being a frontliner, patient or a close contact;

b. Performing any form of coercion or harassment to force or influence a person to leave a leased or shared premises, solely by reason of being a frontliner, patient or close contact;

c. Removing or firing a person from employment, solely by reason of being a frontliner, patient or close contact;

d. Refusal to follow set guidelines by the appropriate government agencies on hazard pay, special risk allowance, or other mandatory benefits, allowances or compensation;

e. Refusal of entry into or expelling frontliners from groceries, convenience stores, markets, palengkes, banks, banyar centers or other financial services, and the like;

f. Refusing to allow frontliners access to basic services such as food preparation and delivery, transportation, laundry, healthcare, medicine, and the like.

2. Commit any act intended to prejudice against, cause injury to, or harass or those which tend to cause shame or humiliation to frontliners, patients, or close contacts, or hiring, engaging, influencing others to do the same, such as:

a. Any form of physical, mental or emotional violence or abuse;

b. Any form of coercion or threat of physical, mental or emotional violence;

c. Any form of financial or economic abuse such as, but not limited to, refusing loans or forfeiting those already granted, rejecting valid payments, failing to properly compensate, denying any support legally due, solely by reason of being a frontliner, patient or close contact;

--- [Page 4] ---
Page 4 of 5
Ord. No. 0255-20

d. Disclosing the information of a person, including, but not limited to, his/her name, known address, place of work or employment, known alias, medical details, or implying the identity of, or claiming that a person – whether verified or not by DDH – is a frontliner, patient or close contact, unless done so with the permission of such individual or DDH;

e. Any form of cyber-bullying or the sharing of classified or private communication without the consent of all involved in the same, or any malicious acts done online, whether the information shared be true or made-up, against the name, dignity or honor of a frontliner, patient or close contact;

3. Any other act of discrimination or prejudice against which demeans, reduces or nullifies the enjoyment or exercise of a frontliner, patient, or close contact's human and legal rights, or hiring, engaging, influencing others to do the same.

B. In addition to the above acts, it shall be unlawful for any public official, employee, health or medical service provider or law enforcement officer to refuse assistance, deny service to or block aid, or hiring, engaging, influencing others to do the same, to a frontliner, patient or close contact who wished to enforce his/her rights, unless such person is in violation of the guidelines of the Department of Health and other existing laws.

SECTION 4. PENALTY CLAUSE: Any violation of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be punished by a fine of Five Thousand Pesos (P5,000) and/or imprisonment of not more than 1 year for each offense committed, without prejudice to the prosecution of other administrative, criminal, or civil actions.

Provided, that if the offender is a juridical person, the employees, owners, partners, managers or board of directors who participated, contributed or tolerated the act shall be held individually liable.

SECTION 5. REPEALING CLAUSE: Any Ordinance, local issuances or rules inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 6. SEPARABILITY CLAUSE: If, for any reason, any section of this Ordinance is declared unconstitutional or invalid, other sections or provisions hereof which are not affected thereby, shall continue to be in full force and effect.

SECTION 7. EFFECTIVITY: This Ordinance shall take effect fifteen (15) days upon approval, posting and publication in a newspaper of local circulation in Davao City.

--- [Page 5] ---
Page 5 of 5
Ord. No. 0255-20

ENACTED, on the 16th day of April, 2020, by a unanimous vote of all the Members of the Sanggunian, there being a quorum.

CERTIFIED CORRECT:

For and in the absence of the Secretary:

MA. THERESA A. REYES
Acting Assistant Secretary to the Sangguniang Panlungsod (Local Legislative Staff Officer IV)

ATTESTED:

SEBASTIAN Z. DUTERTE
Vice Mayor
Presiding Officer
mtar/kjtq

APPROVED: 05 MAY 2020

ATTESTED:

ATTY. ZULEIKA J. LOPEZ
City Administrator