=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 000078-00_Health and Sanitation Ordinance ===

--- [Page 1] ---
Republika ng Pilipinas
SANGUNAN NG PANTULINGGOD
Lungsod ng Davao
Twelfth City Council
13th Regular Session
Ordinance No. 078
Series of 2000
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND REVISION OF ORDINANCE NO. 56,
SERIES OF 1948, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS "THE HEALTH AND
SANITATION ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF DAVAO" IN ORDER TO BE MORE RELEVANT TO THE ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH AND
SANITATION NEEDS OF THE DAVAO CITIZENRY.
Be it ordained by the Sangguniang Panlungsod ng Davao City in session
assembled:
CHAPTER I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 1: TITLE. This ordinance shall be known and cited as "The Environmental Health and Sanitation Ordinance of Davao City".
SECTION 2: SCOPE AND COVERAGE. The provisions of this ordinance shall be applicable within the entire territorial jurisdiction of the City of Davao.
SECTION 3: THE POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE CITY HEALTH OFFICER. The City Health Officer is provided for in the Charter Law of the City of Davao. He shall have the following powers and functions:
a) Exercise general supervision and control over the environmental health and sanitation activities in the City of Davao;
b) Formulate and recommend laws, rules and regulations for approval of the City Council;
c) Institute all proceedings necessary to abate all nuisances;
d) Recommend the closure of any establishment or prosecution of any person in violation of the provisions of this ordinance;
e) Declare a quarantine in times of epidemic;
f) May at all reasonable times enter into any premises for purposes of inspection or any actions necessary for the enforcement of this ordinance;
g) Perform such other powers and functions as provided by law in the enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance and other rules and regulations.
SECTION 4: DEFINITION OF TERMS. For purposes of this Ordinance the following terms are defined as follows:
1. "Airport Terminal" is a building or group of buildings used for accommodating arriving and departing passengers and cargoes

--- [Page 2] ---
2. "Apartel" refers to a cottage or unit with one or more rooms distinctly different from hotel room in such a way that cooking is allowed inside, and that complete facilities, sanitation and ventilation for such are provided.
3. "Balcony Section" refers to that part or portion of a cinema or movie house usually located above the orchestra section or at the upper part of the building, having its own separate entrance and exit. It is usually intended for comfortable viewing purposes by a relatively proportionate number of viewers.
4. "Backyard Domesticated Animals" refers to a project involving a maximum of three (3) domesticated animals usually managed by a household.
5. "Backyard Domesticated Foxes" refers to a project involving a maximum of ten (10) foxes usually managed by a household.
6. "Burial" refers to the interment of remains in a grave or tomb, and cremated remains in the sea.
7. "Bus Stop" is a common place for stopping of buses along the highways of regular route for transport in a long travel.
8. "Bus Terminal" is a building or edifice intended for the parking of buses, disembarking of arriving passengers, or embarking of departing passengers and the loading and unloading of cargoes.
9. "C.V.O." refers to an abbreviation which means City Veterinarian Office.
10. "Certificate of Non-Coverage (CNC)" refers to a certification issued by the DENR that the project under consideration does not fall under the Environmentally Critical Projects (ECP) or Environmentally Critical Area (ECA) under the Environmental Impact Statement System (EIS) and therefore exempted from securing from an ECC.
11. "Certificate of Potability" is a certificate in writing issued by the City Health Officer upon the recommendation of the Rural Sanitation Inspector concerned, that the water supply source, after the required inspection and required laboratory examinations, submission of water sample for bacteriological and chemical examination have conform with the Philippine National Standard for Drinking Water.
12. "Condominium" is a building with one or more units consisting of several units of residential nature usually owned or rented by the occupants which units are provided with common areas, common facilities, utilities, and other amenities.
13. "Construction Site" is a plan where construction activities are undertaken usually by a contractor to construct, erect, demolish, renovate, a building or edifice or institution or any other structure intended for any purpose or purposes.
14. "Cremation" is a process that reduces human remains to bone fragments of fine sand or ashes through combustion and dehydration.
15. "Dairy" is an establishment for the production, sale, or distribution of milk or milk products such as butter or cheese.
16. "District Health Offices" refer to the Medical Offices of the Health Districts of Davao City.
17. "Domesticated Animals" refer to and shall include carabao, cows, horses, goats, sheep, pigs, guinea pigs and other similar animals.
18. "Domesticated Animal Farm" refers to any parcel of land, buildings, or other structure used for keeping, raising or breeding, depositing, feeding or watering of four (4) or more domesticated animals and generally under the management of a tenant or owner. This also refers to any piggy farm and dairy farm.

--- [Page 3] ---
19. "Domesticated Fowl Farm" refers to any parcel of land, building or other structures used or devoted to the raising of more than ten (10) domesticated fowls, and generally under the management of a tenant or owner. This includes poultry farms, fighting cock breeding farms and other fowl farms.
20. "Domesticated Fowls" refer to and shall include chickens, ducks, goose, turkeys, quails, pigeons and other fowls.
21. "Domesticated Pet Animals" refer to and shall include cats, dogs and other animals for hobby purpose except for endangered species.
22. "Drinking Water" refers to the water intended for direct human consumption and used in food preparation.
23. "Duly Authorized Person" refers to the Assistant City Health Officer, or Rural Health Physician or Rural Sanitation Inspector delegated to perform specific functions of the City Health Office.
24. "Entertainer" refers to any employee of a nightspot who entertains patrons or customers by singing and/or dancing, dancing, eating or drinking with them. This shall include but not be limited to: singers, dancers, macho dancers, hostesses, guest relations officers (GRO), receptionists, singers or members of the band, dance instructors or instructresses in dance halls.
25. "Environmental Compliance Certificate (ECC)" is a document issued by the DENR to certify that the project under consideration will have a minimal environmental effects for as long as the conditions stipulated in the ECC are strictly followed, and that the proponent has complied with the requirements of the EIS System.
26. "Environmental Health Assessment Report (E-HAR)" refers to a report issued by the duly authorized officer of the Department of Health (DOH) which contains comments, recommendations, and other inputs, that the proposed project, activity or undertaking has undergone review by the DOH. This shall be submitted to the Department of Environment and Natural Resources.
27. "Environmental Impact Statement System (EIS)" refers to the entire process of organization, administration and procedure institutionalized for the purpose of assessing the significance of the effects of physical developments on the quality of the environment.
28. "Excessive noise" refers to a noise emitted from any processes, activities or undertakings which is more than the allowable standards and the period of time as provided in Chapter XVI of this Ordinance.
29. "Existing Establishments" are establishments existing or actually operating before the approval of this ordinance. These do not include establishments which are still under construction after the approval of this ordinance. These are therefore, considered new establishments.
30. "Food" refers to any raw, cooked or processed edible substances, beverages or ingredients used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in part for human consumption.
31. "Food Caters" refers to any person maintaining or operating a kitchen or any similar establishment for the preparation, storing, cooking or processing of foods or drinks for sale or hired to serve to persons elsewhere.

--- [Page 4] ---
32. "Food and Drinking Establishments" are establishments where food or drinks are prepared, processed, cooked, handled, stored, displayed, sold or served including those that are located within the shopping complex, malls, plazas, or centers, passenger ships or vessels, bus stations, seaports, and airport terminals and other similar establishments.

33. "Food Handler" refers to any person who manufactures, processes, handles, stores, prepares, serves, food, drinks or ice, who comes in contact with any eating or cooking utensils, food and drink contact surfaces, and other food vending machines.

34. "Food Processing or Manufacturing Establishments" are those establishments where food and drinks or any articles of food or food products and drinks are manufactured or processed and are typically produced in high quantities or volumes. These include bottling plants, canning plants, fruit processing plants, poultry dressing plants, and other similar establishments.

35. "Lazard" is a risk or danger to one's health or life.

36. "Health and Safety Management Plan" refers to a document required for submission to the D.O.H. by proponents or owners containing the project description, data on health and safety hazards, and recommended strategies to prevent or mitigate these identified hazards. This document also certifies that the proposed project activity or undertaking does not fall under the Health Sensitive Project or Health Sensitive Project Location.

37. "Health Certificate or H.C." is a certification in writing using the prescribed form issued by the City Health Officer stating that the person applying for or renewing such certificate, is permitted by the said Officer or his duly authorized representative to work in a Health Sensitive Project or Health Sensitive Project Location. The certificate may be renewed for a fee.

38. "Hotel" is a building, edifice or premise or a completely independent part thereof which is for the regular reception of transient guests, accommodations or lodging of travelers and tourists, and the provisions of services incident thereto for a fee.

39. "Hotel Guest" refers to an occupant of a hotel room.

40. "IRF" refers to an abbreviation which means implementing Rules and Regulations.

41. "Lobby" is a foyer or anteroom or waiting room furnished with lounges, chairs or sofas where patrons, customers and guests can stay or relax.

42. "Local Health Authority" refers to the Chief Executive or the City Mayor.

43. "Local Health Officer" refers to the City Health Officer.

44. "Lodging House" is a building where transient persons are usually supplied with and charged for sleeping accommodations only.

45. "Mall or Supermarket or Shopping Complex or Center" is usually a multi-level building or edifice composed of department stores, supermarkets, several units of stall or store space for rent or lease to be used for the selling of any food and non-food items, offering office, clinic, recreational facilities and other spaces intended and to be used for any business purposes and recreational purposes.

46. "Massage Attendant" is a trained person who has complied with the basic requirement for massage attendant and authorized or permitted by the City Health Office to massage customers under the guidance of a registered masseur.

--- [Page 5] ---
47. "Massage Clinic" is an establishment equipped with necessary facilities for the practice of massage under the guidance/supervision of a registered masseur.
48. "Motel" is a roadside hotel consisting of private cabins with private parking space usually intended for motorists.
49. "Night Spots" are establishments not only serving food and drinks but also providing customers with additional entertainment such as singing, dancing, live or recorded music entertainers, live shows, bands, film showing, and using of function rooms and usually operates during night time.
50. "Nuisance" refers to anything that injures health, endangers life, offends the senses or produces discomfort to the community.
51. "Objectifiable odor" refers to an odor emitted from any processes, activities or undertakings which by its own characteristics in combination with other odors may offend or affect the employment of a normal sense of smell, health, and well-being of an individual or the community.
52. "Orchestra Section" refers to that part or section of a cinema or movie house usually located below the balcony section having its own entrance and exit. It is intended for viewing purposes by a relatively proportionate number of viewers.
53. "P.D. 522" refers to the Sanitation of Establishments for the Protection and Convenience of the Traveling Public.
54. "P.D. 856" refers to the Code on Sanitation of the Philippines.
55. "Person" shall be construed to mean, any individual, contractor, agent, owner, administrator, manager representing firms, establishments, institutions, society, association, partnership or corporation.
56. "Public and Private Gatherings" refer to and shall include meetings, conventions, assemblies, religious rallies and other similar gatherings held outdoors or in any open public or private places.
57. "R.H.P." refers to an abbreviation which means Rural Health Physician.
58. "Recreational Establishments or Facilities" are edifices, buildings or premises or facilities used for the holding of one or more recreational activities such as table tennis, pool table, video games, bowling, billiard, cockfighting and other similar recreational activities. These include cockpits, bowling alleys or lanes, and billiard halls.
59. "Rest Area" is a facility located at strategic point along the national highway or the route of the traveling public where parking space, food and other business establishments, sanitary and recreational facilities and other amenities.
60. "Rural Sanitation Inspector or R.S.I." refers to an employee of the City Government of Davao under the Office of the City Health Officer who enforces sanitation law, ordinances, rules and regulations and implements environmental sanitation activities.
61. "S.T.D." refers to an abbreviation which means Sexually Transmitted Diseases.
62. "S.T.D. Examination" refers to any examination of human body to determine the presence of STD.
63. "Sanitary Facility Clearance (SFC)" is a certification in writing issued by the City Health Officer for the reauthorization of the Rural Health Physician concerned that the establishment after inspection and evaluation of the Rural Sanitation Inspector, has complied with the specific sanitary requirements for the operation of such type of establishment.

--- [Page 6] ---
64. "Sanitary Order" is an order in writing, using the prescribed form issued by the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative to any person in order to comply with the terms and conditions stated or specified in such order.
65. "Sanitary Permit or S.P." is a certification in writing issued by the City Health Officer as recommended by the Chief of the Sanitation Section, that the owner or occupant of such establishment has been permitted to operate for the purpose or purposes stated in the application for Sanitary Permit.
66. "Sauna Bath Attendant" is a person who applies the proper techniques of giving steam bath to customers.
67. "Sauna Bath Establishment" is an establishment where customers are exposed to steam which is generated by spiking water or hot stones or by some other means.
68. "Sports Complex" refers to any building, office, or premise where various sports activities such as basketball, boxing, volleyball and other sports are held. This also refers to an auditorium, gymnasium, coliseum, astrodome and any other sport center.
69. "Terminal Station" is a passenger station and a place for the final stopover or a permanent station, office and yard of public utility vehicles, which may also serve as loading and unloading areas for passengers.
70. "Toilet Facility" is a facility usually consisting of water closet, urinal and lavatory.
71. "Transient Entertainment Shows" refer to and shall include circuses, carnivals, expositions, exhibits, fairs and other similar shows held outdoors or in any open public or private places.
72. "Water Closet" refers to and consists of a water tank with flushing facility and bowl.
73. "Wing of a Building" refers to any extended part or structure of a building in secondary or subordinate capacity from the main or principal building which is also intended for public use.

--- [Page 7] ---
**Page 7 of 77**

**CHAPTER II: SANITARY INSPECTION CLEARANCE, SANITARY PERMIT, HEALTH CERTIFICATES AND INSPECTION OR EVALUATION RATINGS OF BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT**

**SECTION 1: SANITARY INSPECTION CLEARANCE.** Unless otherwise provided in this ordinance, no person shall be issued a Sanitary Permit to operate any business establishment unless a Sanitary Inspection Clearance is secured from the Rural Health Physician concerned upon the assessment, evaluation and recommendations of which the Rural Health Physician concerned shall offer:

1.1 Payment of the required Sanitary Inspection Clearance Fee. The fees payable shall be in such amount as to be determined and approved by the City Council through a City Ordinance.

1.2 All required documents (plans, specifications, design) shall have been submitted (for new establishments and renovated establishments).

1.3 The submitted documents shall have been reviewed by the Sanitation Division or Section and approved by the City Health Officer (for new establishments).

1.4 The required inspection and evaluation shall have been undertaken. The inspection and evaluation shall be conducted within ten (10) working days after the payment of the sanitary clearance fee.

1.5 Sanitary Inspection Clearance shall also be required in the following:

a) Request for sanitary inspection of establishments and/or facilities for the purpose of inspection or evaluation rating of business establishments

b) Request for the lifting of Sanitary Permit revocation or closure or establishment, facilities or premises.

**SECTION 2: SANITARY PERMIT.** Unless otherwise provided in this ordinance, no person shall operate any business establishment unless a Sanitary Permit to Operate is issued by the City Health Officer upon the recommendation of the Chief of Sanitation Section and upon submission of the required Sanitary Inspection Clearance.

2.1 Application and Renewal of Sanitary Permit

2.1.1 The application and renewal of sanitary permit shall be filed with the City Health Office.

2.1.2 All Sanitary Permits shall be valid up to the last day of December of each year of issuance, unless otherwise revoked or suspended by a duly authorized local health authority upon the recommendation of the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative and shall be renewed every year.

2.1.3 The original Sanitary Permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place of the establishment and shall be available for inspection by the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative.

2.1.4 Prescribed Sanitary Permit Fees shall be paid upon each application, renewal, and re-issuance.

--- [Page 8] ---
2.15. Requirements for new application:
a) Submission of a Sanitary Inspection Clearance;
b) Receipt of payment for the prescribed Sanitary Permit Fee for such type of establishment;
c) Compliance to at least a satisfactory rating after inspection or evaluation using the checklist for such type of establishment;
d) Annual vermin abatement plan or contract from a DOH accredited pest control operator.

2.16. Requirements for Renewal of Sanitary Permit: The following are the requirements for renewal of Sanitary Permit:
a) Re-submission of Sanitary Inspection Clearance;
b) Receipt of payment for the prescribed Sanitary Permit Fee;
c) The maintenance of a satisfactory rating after re-evaluation;
d) Annual vermin abatement plan or contract from a DOH accredited pest control operator.

2.17. Application for the Re-issuance of a new Sanitary Permit: Application for the re-issuance of a new Sanitary Permit shall be granted upon receipt of an application for a change in the ownership or management of an establishment before the expiration of the validity of the original Sanitary Permit. Such changes of ownership or management shall be noted in the records of the City Health Office. Prescribed Sanitary Permit Fee shall be paid upon application.

2.18. Application for Additional Line of Business or Branches: If there is an application for additional line of businesses or branches, the establishment shall be treated as a new establishment. Such additional line of business or businesses and branches shall be noted in the records of the City Health Office. Prescribed Sanitary Permit Fee shall be paid upon application.

2.19. Application for an Extension or Additional Construction or Alteration of Any Existing Establishment: If there is an application for an extension or additional construction or alteration of any existing establishment, it shall be treated as a new establishment. Such additional line of business or construction or alteration shall be noted in the records of the City Health Office. Prescribed Sanitary Permit Fee for such type of establishment shall be paid upon application.

2.2. Record of Sanitary Permits: The City Health Office shall keep a record or list of Sanitary Permits issued, renewed, or re-issued and shall in every case show the following:
a) The name and address of the holder of the Sanitary Permit who in every case shall be the actual owner or occupant of the establishment;
b) The business name, location, exact address, and sketch of the establishment.

--- [Page 9] ---
Page 9 of 77

c) If there is a change in the original address or there is a transfer of the operation of the establishment, such change of address or transfer shall be duly noted in the record of sanitary permit upon payment of transfer fee, the amount to be set and approved by the City Council through an ordinance.

d) The purpose or purposes for which the permit had been issued;

e) The date of the first permit was issued and dates of any renewal thereof;

f) Every change of ownership or management of an establishment since the permit was issued;

g) Every additional line of business or businesses or branches applied and granted;

h) Every additional extension or construction or construction applied and granted;

i) Conditions under which the permit was issued or any renewal thereof granted; and,

j) The record shall be available at all reasonable time for inspection by the Local Health Authority or other duly authorized person.

SECTION 3. HEALTH CERTIFICATE: Unless otherwise provided in this ordinance, no person shall be employed in any business establishment without first securing a health certificate from the City Health Office, including the following:

a) Drivers and conductors of public utility vehicles such as bus, jeeps, taxicabs and bicycles;

b) Employees or personnel of any type of industrial establishments (agricultural, marine, chemical, cement, etc.);

c) All employees of drugstores and pharmaceutical companies;

d) Security Guards;

e) Owners, operators, administrators and employees of food and non-food establishments;

f) Employees of food and drinking establishments located within passenger vessels or ships;

g) All ambulant food vendors (whether itinerant or non-itinerant).

3.1 Application and Renewal of Health Certificate:

a) The application or renewal of the Health Certificate shall be applied and issued by the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative;

b) The Health Certificate shall be valid up to the last day of December of the year of issuance and subject for renewal every year thereafter;

c) Prescribed Health Certificate Fee shall be paid upon application and renewal;

d) Prescribed Laboratory Examination Fee shall be paid before submission of the specimens.

--- [Page 10] ---
Page 10 of 77

o) The Health Certificates shall be kept in the office or care of the owner of the establishment when the employees are not working and shall be available anytime for inspection.

f) The Health Certificate shall be clipped in the upper left front portion of the garment of the employee while working.

g) Health Certificate is non-transferable.

3.2. Requirements for New Application: The following are the requirements for new application of Health Certificate:

a) Receipt of payment for the prescribed Health Certificate;

b) Certificate on Basic Food Handling with regard to employees of food and drinking establishments;

c) Basic Laboratory results of (required to all applicants):

i. Urinalysis

ii. Fecalysis

iii. Sputum or x-ray examination

d) Other laboratory results for massage clinic or sauna bath attendant, entertainers and other personnel including dance instructor/instructors in dancing halls; singers and entertainers:

i. VDRL/RPR

ii. HIV (optional)

iii. HbsAg

iv. Weekly or bi-monthly urethral or cervical smear examination

e) Other laboratory results for drivers and conductors of public utility vehicles (PUJs) and tricycle drivers and security guards:

i. Drug test

ii. Neuro-psychiatric test or examination

iii. VDRL (optional)

iv. EBTI Certificate (optional for security guards)

f) Immunizations and other additional examinations treatment or requirements as may be required by the City Health Officer.

3.3. Requirements for Renewal: The following are the requirements for renewal of Health Certificate:

a) Receipts of payment for the prescribed health certificate and laboratory examinations fee;

b) Certificate of attendance in a food handlers class (with regard to employees of food establishments) as per the regulation of the State/DAIDS director;

c) Previous basic laboratory results that are still valid for renewal. These include normal chest/x-ray/pulmonary results that are not more than six months old from the date of the examination up to the date of renewal.

3.4. Record of Health Certificates: The City Health Officer shall keep a record and list of all health certificates of each type or color issued and renewed and shall in every case show the following (see annex for sample).

--- [Page 11] ---
Page 11 of 77

a) The name, address, type of position applied for, of the holder of the health certificate;

b) The color of health certificate and the nature of work:

i. cream card - for food handlers;
ii. pink card - for massage clinics or sauna bath attendants and entertainers in night spots;
iii. light green card - for non-food handlers.

c) The business name, address and type of establishment;

d) The date of the first health certificate was issued and the dates of any renewal thereof.

The record shall be available at all reasonable time for inspection by the Local Health Authority or other duly authorized health personnel.

SECTION 4. INSPECTION OR EVALUATION RATING OF BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS OR FACILITIES: Every business establishment or facility requiring a sanitary permit for its operation shall be inspected or evaluated in accordance with the frequency of inspection for such type of establishment. It shall cause additional inspection or re-inspection and evaluation as deemed necessary as enforced by the provisions of this ordinance. The inspection form provided is applicable for such type of establishment provided for the purpose (see attached sample form).

4.1. The Rural Sanitation Inspector who carried out the inspection shall furnish such report to the holder of the sanitary permit.

4.2. Demerits entered in the appropriate column of the inspection form shall indicate that the item does not conform to the requirements of this ordinance.

4.3. The inspection form has twenty (20) items. Non-complying items are indicated with an (x). Every such item is weighed with a demerit of 5. The rating of the establishment is therefore 100 less (number of demerits x 5). The result is expressed as percentage (%) rated.

4.4. Sanitation Standard Rating

TABLE I

PERCENTAGE RATING SANITATION STANDARD SANITATION STANDARD STICKER COLOR CODE
90-100% Excellent Luminous Green
70-89% Very Satisfactory Luminous Yellow
50-69% Satisfactory Red-Orange

4.4.1 Business establishments with percentage rating below fifty percent (50%) shall be recommended for temporary closure until compliance.

4.4.2 Sanitation Standard Sticker (SSRS)

a) The SSRS shall be subsequently issued to the establishment after the inspection or evaluation;

b) It shall be posted in a conspicuous place of the establishment, preferably at the door, for guidance of the clientele;

--- [Page 12] ---
Page 12 of 77

c) The SARS shall be renewed every time an inspection or evaluation was conducted. Frequency of inspections shall be as follows:

TABLE 2

TYPE OF ESTABLISHMENT FREQUENCY OF INSPECTION (Minimum Number of Inspection)

Food Establishment and Night Spots:
- Class A: At least once every 3 months
- Class B: At least once every 2 months
- Class C: At least once a week
- Other Food Establishments: At least once every 6 months

Public Places:
- Hotels, motels, and apartments lodging, boarding or tenement houses, and condominiums: At least once every 3 months
- Urban pest control operator or establishments: At least once every 3 months
- Cemetery, Memorial parks, crematoriums, and funeral and embalming establishments: At least once every 3 months

Healthcare Establishments:
- Massage clinic and sauna bath establishments: At least once every 3 months
- Schools and Movie Houses: At least once every 3 months
- Establishments engaged in offensive trading & occupations: At least once every 3 months
- Abattoirs or slaughterhouses: At least once every 3 months

Industrial Establishments:
- Food processing and manufacturing establishments: At least once every 6 months
- Refuse collection service establishments refuse disposal area and facilities: At least once every 3 months

Social Establishments:
- Dancing Schools, dance halls and night clubs: At least once every 3 months
- Rest areas, bus terminals, bus stops and service stations: At least once every 3 months
- Tonsorial and Beauty establishments: At least once every 3 months
- Public Laundry: At least once every 3 months
- Other Public Places: At least once every 3 months

--- [Page 13] ---
**Page 13 of 77**

**CHAPTER III: SANITARY ORDER, CLOSURE, APPEAL AND POWER OF ENTRY**

**SECTION I: SANITARY ORDER ISSUANCE**

1.1 First Issue: A sanitary order is first issued, after inspection and evaluation by the Rural Sanitation Inspector concerned, to any person who has authority over any premises, place or space of any part of the building or business or business establishments to:

a) Abate any nuisance as provided in Chapter XVI of this Ordinance by introducing or adopting the recommended remedial actions or measures for non-compliance with specific requirements;

b) Correct any deficiencies by effecting the recommended corrective measures;

c) Undertake any other measures or actions. It shall be indicated in such order the recommended corrective measures or remedial actions to be effected or undertaken and the reasonable period for its compliance.

The recommended corrective measures or remedial actions to be effected or done shall be specific in nature and should be written in a simple and understandable language. The reasonable period of time or the period of time required to effect or undertake the recommended corrective measures or remedial actions shall be stated in the order and holidays. The issuance of Sanitary Order shall only be done and serve during regular working days and hours. The Sanitary Order shall be issued and served by the Rural Sanitation Inspector concerned and approved by the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative.

1.2 Second Issue: A second Sanitary Order may only be issued before the expiration of the first order, to extend the period of time for the compliance of the terms and conditions specified in the first order. Such extension may only be granted when the following conditions are met:

a) That the person concerned has made a request, such request may be made at any time, and the request in writing to the City Health Officer, that an additional period of time is needed to finish the recommended corrective or remedial actions to be effected or undertaken;

b) That the Rural Sanitation Inspector upon evaluation, has found that the corrective measures or remedial actions to be effected or undertaken has already started or commenced within the specific time indicated in the first order issued.

**SECTION II: SANITARY ORDER ACKNOWLEDGEMENT:** Any person to whom the Sanitary Order is to be issued or served shall acknowledge the receipt of such order. Any person who refuses to acknowledge the receipt of such order shall be guilty of receiving the penalties and is subjected to the penalties prescribed in the penal provisions of this ordinance.

**SECTION III: CLOSURE OR SUSPENSION OF SANITARY PERMIT:** Closure or Suspension of Sanitary Permit: If the second Sanitary Order of the first Sanitary Order, in cases where a second Sanitary Order is not applicable, have already expired and the terms and conditions of the Sanitary Orders issued have not been satisfactorily complied with so that the repeated failure to comply is inexcusable, the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative, or the Rural Sanitation Inspector, shall recommend to the Local Health Authority the suspension of the Sanitary Permit or the immediate closure of the establishment or facility, premises, or spaces.

--- [Page 14] ---
**Page 14 of 17**

**SECTION 4. LIFTING OF CLOSURE OR SUSPENSION OF SANITARY PERMIT:**
Lifting of closure or suspension of sanitary permit shall only be recommended by the Local Health Authority:

a) when the owner, operator, or administrator shall request in writing addressed to the City Health Officer for re-evaluation or re-inspection of the establishment or premises, after payment of the prescribed Sanitary Inspection Clearance fee;

b) when in the judgment of the City Health Officer the deficiencies were satisfactorily corrected or that the nuisance had been abated after the re-inspection and evaluation.

**SECTION 5. APPEALS:**
Any person to whom such closure order was issued, may file a request addressed to the City Health Officer, for the conduct of a preliminary hearing which shall be chaired by the City Health Officer and will have as its members, the Chief of the Sanitation Section, the Rural Sanitation Inspector, and Rural Health Physician who conducted the inspection and how other members to be designated by the City Health Officer.

Any person to whom such closure order was issued may file a written petition or appeal addressed to the Local Health Authority (LHA) if he is not satisfied with the action of the City Health Officer after the preliminary hearing. He shall be afforded a final hearing within 48 hours by a panel chaired by the Local Health Authority or his duly designated representative upon presentation of proper credentials identification card, proper uniform, office order/mission order intended or used for purposes for punishment or imprisonment or any other actions necessary for the effective enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance.

**SECTION 6. POWER OF ENTRY:**
Any Rural Sanitation Inspector or duly authorized representative of the City Health Officer upon presentation of proper credentials identification card, proper uniform, office order/mission order intended or used for purposes for punishment or imprisonment or any other actions necessary for the effective enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance, shall be guilty of misdemeanor and is subject to the penalties prescribed in the penal provisions of this ordinance.

--- [Page 15] ---
**Page 15 of 77**

**CHAPTER IV. ESTABLISHMENTS ENGAGED IN THE BUSINESS OF EXCAVATION AND DISPOSAL OF SLUDGE FROM SEPTIC TANK AND OTHER TREATMENT FACILITIES AND HUMAN EXCRETA FROM PORTABLE TYPE OF TOILET FACILITIES**

**SECTION 1.** The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all establishments engaged in the business of excavation and disposal of sludge from any septic tank, cesspool, vault treatment facilities or other places where such sludge are stored or in the business involved in the disposal of type of toilet facility through filling or issuing the disposal of its contents.

**SECTION 2.** SANITARY REQUIREMENTS

**2.1.** Sanitary Permit. No person shall be allowed to operate any establishment as herein described unless a sanitary permit issued by the City Health Officer has been secured.

**2.2.** Sanitary Inspection Clearance. A Sanitary Inspection Clearance issued by the City Health Officer upon the recommendation of the Rural Health Officer and a certificate of a licensed Physician concerned shall be secured before a sanitary permit to operate is issued.

**2.3.** Health Certificate. No person shall be allowed to work in this establishment unless a health certificate issued by the City Health Officer or his authorized representative has been secured and shall be in accordance with Section 3, Chapter II of this Ordinance.

**SECTION 3.** LOCATION AND REQUIREMENTS OF DISPOSAL SITE FOR SLUDGE AND SEPTIC TANK FOR HUMAN EXCRETA

**3.1.** Location of Disposal Site

**3.1.1.** The location site of the disposal of sludge from the septic tank shall be in accordance with the IFR of P.D. 856.

**3.1.2.** The location and specification requirements of septic tank for the disposal of human excreta from portable type of toilet facility shall be in accordance with the IFR of P.D. 856.

**3.2.** Requirements of Disposal Site

**3.2.1.** It shall be located not less than 500 meters away from any built-up areas such as commercial, institutional, industrial, and residential or subdivision areas.

**3.2.2.** It shall not be located in flood prone areas and other environmentally critical areas like watersheds and sources of water supply.

**3.2.3.** The site shall be planted with trees to protect it from strong winds thereby minimizing odor.

**3.2.4.** It shall be located at least 500 meters away from any major road or highways.

**3.2.5.** If it is in flat ground it shall be covered with fill of earth or other materials acceptable to the City Health Officer within 24 hours upon arrival at the disposal site. The depth of the cover shall not be less than 15 centimeters (6 inches) soil cover free of cracks.

--- [Page 16] ---
Page 16 of 77

3.2.6 It shall be located away from any path of immediate (5 - 10 years) urban expansion.

3.3 Requirements for Disposal

3.3.1 Human excreta coming from the container of portable type of toilet facility, or:

3.3.2 Sludge coming from any septic tanks, treatment facilities, vaults, or any other places where such sludge is being stored, shall not be disposed into:

a) A public disposal area intended for the exclusive use or disposal of refuse or solid wastes except for the approved sanitary landfill;

b) An abandoned water supply well, spring, or cistern; or,

c) A natural or artificial well, sink, hole, crevice, or other opening extending into limestone, sandstone, or other rock or stone formation; or,

d) The surface of the ground or into any street, road, alley, open excavation, storm sewer, land drain ditch adjoining property, water course or body of water.

3.4 Excavation and Disposal Permit, Equipment and Vehicles. An excavation and disposal permit shall be paid upon application. The amount shall be set and approved by the City Council through an ordinance.

3.4.1 Excavation and disposal of such sludge and human excreta shall only be undertaken during the early morning from 1:00 to 3:00 a.m. Unfinished excavation and disposal activities shall be suspended and resumed on the following day at the prescribed time.

3.4.2 A sufficient number of equipment and closed vehicles shall be provided for the sanitary collection and transport of such sludge and human excreta.

SECTION 4 EXISTING ESTABLISHMENTS OR BUSINESS Existing establishments or businesses which have been in need or completed with the requirements specified in this chapter prior to the approval of this ordinance, shall be permitted for a reasonable period of time, subject to the approval of the City Health Officer, upon the recommendation of the Rural Sanitation Inspector and Rural Health Physician concerned or by the Chief of the Sanitation Section to comply with such requirements.

--- [Page 17] ---
**Page 17 of 77**

**CHAPTER V MULTISTOREY BUILDING**

**SECTION I: SANITARY FACILITIES REQUIREMENTS**

1.1. *Toilet Facilities:* Any person having control and authority over any building used for any purpose shall provide such building with toilet facilities. If such building is more than one (1) floor or storey, each floor or storey including its mezzanines, basements, and rooftops, provided such parts of the building are operated for public use, shall be provided with such toilet facilities.

1.2. Sewage or Waste Water Disposal and Drainage shall comply with Section 3, Sub-section 3.2, Chapter XV of this Ordinance.

1.3. Vermin Abatement Program

1.3.1. Shall comply with Section 3, Sub-section 3.4, Chapter XV of this Ordinance.

1.3.2. Other pertinent provision regarding sanitary facilities requirements provided in any chapter of this Ordinance shall, if applicable, be adhered to.

**SECTION 2: EXISTING BUILDINGS:** All buildings existing before the approval of this ordinance which have not satisfactorily complied with the requirements provided herein shall be given a reasonable period of time to comply with such requirements, subject to the approval of the City Health Officer upon the recommendation of the Chief of the Sanitation Section or by the Rural Sanitation Inspector and Rural Health Physician concerned.

--- [Page 18] ---
**Page 18 of 77**

**CHAPTER VI: CINEMAS OR MOVIEHOUSES, MALLS, SUPERMARKETS AND SHOPPING COMPLEXES OR CENTERS**

**SECTION 1: SANITATION REQUIREMENTS**

1.1. Sanitary Permit: Any person who shall operate any of the establishments specified herein shall secure a Sanitary Permit from the City Health Office upon the recommendation of the Chief of the Sanitation Section before the operation.

1.2. Sanitary Inspection Clearance: A Sanitary Inspection Clearance shall be secured from the City Health Officer upon the recommendation of the Rural Sanitation Inspector and the Rural Health Physician concerned before a Sanitary Permit to Operate is issued.

1.3. Health Certificate: No person shall be employed in these establishments unless a Health Certificate issued by the City Health Officer has been secured and shall be in accordance with Section 3 Chapter II of this Ordinance.

**SECTION 2: SANITARY FACILITIES REQUIREMENTS**

2.1. The following are the sanitary facilities requirements for cinemas or movie houses located outside or within the premises of the mall or supermarkets or shopping complexes or centers, and the construction of the entrance is such that there is a separate entrance used leading to the orchestra and balcony sections and having separate lobbies for each section:

2.1.1. Drinking Water Dispensing Facilities:
   a) A separate drinking water dispensing facilities shall be provided for each section.
   b) Preferably, a ready-made drinking water dispensing machines or equipment of approved type shall be used.
   c) If drinking fountain shall be used, it shall be of approved angle-jet type.
   d) It shall be located in an accessible area within the separate lobby of each section.
   e) A sign board with legible markings "PORTABLE DRINKING WATER" shall be posted near such facilities.

2.1.2. Toilet Facilities:
   a) Separate toilet facilities for the orchestra and balcony sections shall be provided for each sex and for the use of disabled persons.
   b) Number of water closets, urinals and hand washing lavatories.

--- [Page 19] ---
Page 19 of 17

TABLE 1:
ORCHID SECTION
# of Water Closet : # of Urinals : # of Hand washing Lavatory
Male Female Male Female
2 3 1 2
TABLE 2:
BALCONY SECTION
# of Water Closet : # of Urinals : # of Hand washing Lavatory
Male Female Male Female
2 3 1 2

2.1.3 Solid Waste Management: A solid waste receptacle or container shall be provided:
a) It shall be located within the separate lobby of such section.
b) The receptacles or containers shall be made of impervious materials and shall be sufficient in number with tight closing lids or swing covers and each with a compartment for cigarette butts if smoking is allowed.
c) It shall be in accordance with Section 1, Sub-sections 1.1.2, 1.1.3, 1.1.4 and Sub-section 2.1.2, Chapter XII of this Ordinance.

2.1.4 Seating Capacity: These cinemas and movie houses or theaters shall only be allowed to accommodate viewers equal to their total seating capacity.

2.1.5 Sewage or waste disposal and drainage facilities shall be provided.

2.1.6 Emergency Fire Exit: Adequate emergency fire exit shall be provided.

2.2 The following are the sanitary facilities requirements for cinemas or movie houses located outside or within the malls, supermarkets or shopping complex centers and the construction of the common entrance used leading to both balcony and orchestra sections and hearing aids (1. Contact lobby).

2.2.1 Drinking Water Dispensing Facilities:
a) Two (2) common drinking water dispensing facilities shall be provided for both sections;
b) It shall be in accordance with Section 2, Sub-section 2.1.1, (b), (d) and (e) of the Chapter

--- [Page 20] ---
2.2.2 Toilet Facilities
a) One (1) common toilet facility for each sex and for use of disabled viewers shall be provided for both sections;
b) Number of water closets, urinals and hand washing lavatories:
# of Water Closet : # of Urinals : # of Handwashing Lavatory
Male Female : Male : Male Female
3 3 5 2 3

2.2.3 Liquid Waste Management
a) It shall be located within the common lobby of both sections;
b) The same with Section 3, Sub-section 3.2, Chapter XV of this Ordinance.
2.2.4 Liquid Waste Water Disposal Drainage: It shall be in accordance with Section 3, Sub-section 3.2, Chapter XV of this Ordinance.
2.2.5 Vermin Abatement Program: It shall be in accordance with Section 3, Sub-section 3.4, Chapter XV of this Ordinance.

2.3 Malls, Supermarkets, Shopping Complex or Centers
2.3.1 Drinking Water Dispensing Facilities: A drinking water dispensing facility shall be provided in every level or floor of such establishment:
a) It shall be located 5 meters from the entrances of all toilet facilities of the establishments;
b) It shall be in accordance with Section 2, sub-section 2.1.1, (b), (c) and (e) of this Chapter.
2.3.2 Toilet Facilities: A clearly marked toilet facility shall be provided in every level or floor of such establishment:
a) It shall be located in every 50 meters distance starting from any end part of the entire length of the hallway or mallway of the building or any wing of the building;
b) Separate toilet facilities for each sex and disabled persons shall be provided;
c) Number of water closets, urinals and hand washing lavatories:
# of Water Closet : # of Urinals : # of Handwashing Lavatory
Male Female : Male : Male Female
2 3 3 1 1

--- [Page 21] ---
2.3.3 Solid Waste Management: The same with Section 2, Sub-section 2.1.3 (a), (b) and (c) of this Chapter.

2.3.4 Sewage or Waste Water Disposal and Drainage and Vermin Abatement Program: The same with Sub-sections 2.2.4 and 2.2.5 of this Chapter.

2.3.5 Sectioning of Goods:

a) Goods of different kinds shall be separately arranged, properly stored to prevent accident to buyers and children and labeled fully and accurately. The label should be at least 10 cm high and placed above each kind of goods.

b) All canned goods, readily perishable food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food packed in cartons, refrigerated food, food

--- [Page 22] ---
Page 27 of 77

CHAPTER VII. SPORTS COMPLEXES, RECREATIONAL AND OTHER SIMILAR ESTABLISHMENTS

SECTION 1: The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all sports complexes such as stadiums, gymnasiums, coliseums, and stadiums operated either by government or private entities and recreational establishments such as cockpits, bowling alleys, racetracks, computer centers, billiard halls and children game centers targetranges, golf courses and other similar establishments.

SECTION 2: SANITATION REQUIREMENTS:

2.1. Sanitary Permit: Any person who shall operate any establishments or facilities as herein described shall secure a Sanitary Permit issued by the City Health Officer before its operation.

2.2. Sanitary Inspection Clearance: A Sanitary Inspection Clearance issued by the City Health Officer upon the recommendation of the Rural Sanitation Inspector and the Rural Health Physician of the district concerned shall be secured before a sanitary permit is issued.

2.3. Health Certificate: No person shall be allowed to work in these establishments or facilities unless a health certificate issued by the City Health Officer is presented and shall be in accordance with Section 3, Chapter II of this Ordinance.

SECTION 3: SANITARY FACILITIES REQUIREMENTS:

3.1. Toilet Facilities:

3.1.1. A separate clearly marked comfort rooms for male, female, and disabled persons shall be provided.

3.1.2. Adequate number of plumbing fixtures shall be provided as follows:

Table 1

| Seating Capacity | Water Closet F | Unusual Hand Washing Lavatory M | M | M |
|------------------|-----------------|-----------------------------------|------|
| 1 - 100           | 3              | 2                               | 1    |
| 101 - 200         | 2              | 4                               | 1    |
| 201 - 400         | 3              | 6                               | 2    |
| 401 - 1,000       | 4              | 7                               | 2    |

Note: one (1) additional water closet, uniall, and lavatory shall be provided for each additional 1,000 persons.

3.2. Water Facilities:

3.2.1. The drinking water facilities shall be in accordance with Section 3, Sub-section 3.1, Chapter XVII of this Ordinance.

3.2.2. A drinking fountain of approved angle-type shall be provided in every strategic areas of the establishments and facilities.

3.3. Solid Waste Management: It shall be in accordance with Chapter XII of this Ordinance.

3.4. Liquid Waste Management: It shall be in accordance with Section 3, Sub-Section 3.2, Chapter XV of this Ordinance.

--- [Page 23] ---
Page 23 of 77

3.5 Lighting and Ventilation: All areas of these establishments and facilities shall be properly lighted and ventilated both natural and artificial.

3.6 Venom Abatement Program: It shall be in accordance with Section 3, Sub-section 3.4, Chapter XV of this Ordinance.

3.7 Swimming Pools: It shall be in accordance with Section 3, Chapter XXIII of this Ordinance.

3.8 Overcrowding: These establishments and facilities shall be allowed to accommodate patrons in a number exceeding its total seating capacity provided that the excess shall not be more than ten percent (10%) of its total seating capacity.

SECTION 4. EXISTING ESTABLISHMENTS AND FACILITIES: All existing establishments and facilities operating before the approval of this ordinance and have not complied with its provisions shall be afforded a reasonable period of time to comply subject to the approval of the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative.

--- [Page 24] ---
**Page 24 of 11**

**CHAPTER VIII: NIGHT SPOTS, MASSAGE CLINIC OR PARLOR, SAUNA BATH ESTABLISHMENTS AND DANCE HALLS**

SECTION 1: The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all massage clinics or parlors, sauna bath establishments, dance halls and night spots such as night clubs, bars, disco houses, music or jazz bars, videoke or karaoke bars, cocktail lounges, pub houses and other establishments of similar nature.

SECTION 2: SANITATION REQUIREMENTS

2.1 Sanitary Permit: No person shall be allowed to operate any establishments as herein described unless a Sanitary Permit issued by the City Health Officer has been secured.

2.2 Sanitary Inspection Clearance: A Sanitary Inspection Clearance issued by the City Health Officer upon the recommendation of the Rural Sanitation Inspector and Rural Health Physician concerned shall be secured before a sanitary permit to operate is issued.

2.3 Health Certificate:

2.3.1 No entertainers, dance instructors or instructresses in dance halls, massage attendants and sauna both attendants in these establishments as herein described shall be allowed to work unless a health certificate issued by the City Health Officer has been secured and shall be in accordance with Section 3, Sub-section 3.1 to 3.1.3, and 3.4.b (ii), Chapter II of this Ordinance.

2.3.2 The health certificate (pink card) shall indicate:

2.3.2.1 Personal data of the holder of the pink card;

2.3.2.2 The date and result of the urethral or cervical smear's examination;

2.3.2.3 The date of the next examination.

2.3.3 The pink card shall be released only to the holder or owner after a negative result of the examination shall have been indicated in the card which shall be duly signed by the examiner.

2.3.4 No pink card shall be released to these persons as herein described if a positive result of the examination is obtained or as determined by the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative.

2.3.5 All those clients in medication are required to come back for follow-up examination.

2.3.6 Monitoring of these establishments and its employees as to compliance of the sanitation requirements and the required examinations shall be undertaken by the Rural Health Physician or his duly authorized Rural Sanitation Inspector concerned.

--- [Page 25] ---
2.37 Entertainers, massage or sauna bath attendants and dance instructors or instructresses in dance halls found working during monitoring and inspection without undergoing the required examination as indicated in the 1st sub-clause shall be reported to the City Health Officer who shall give them notice to undergo the required treatment and examinations. All establishments which allow entertainers, massage or sauna bath attendants and dance instructors or instructresses to work without undergoing the required examination and those found to be positive for STD shall be penalized.
2.38 Entertainers, massage or sauna bath attendants and dance instructors or instructresses shall use their real names in the pink card and shall be above eighteen (18) years of age. Certified Xerox/Photocopy of birth certificate shall be presented at the time of application.
2.39 Other Employees: All other employees shall secure a health certificate issued by the City Health Officer before they are allowed to work in these establishments. Shall comply with Chapter 10 of the Revised City Ordinance.
2.310 Other pertinent provisions regarding sanitary facilities requirements provided in other chapters of the ordinance shall, if applicable, be adopted subject to approval of the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative.
SECTION 3 REQUIREMENTS REGARDING VIP ROOMS IN NIGHT SPOTS:
3.1 VIP rooms in these establishments may be permitted subject to the following requirements:
3.1.1 The minimum floor area of the VIP room shall not be less than fifteen (15) square meters.
3.1.2 It shall have a seating capacity of not less than eight (8) persons at one time.
3.1.3 The door of the room shall be of swing type without lock.
3.1.4 The door shall be fitted with a 6 x 12 inches glass pane at the upper middle portion of the door.
3.1.5 The total floor area of all VIP rooms shall not be more than one half (1/2) of the total floor area of the establishments.
3.2 There shall be no private rooms or separate compartments for public use except those used for toilet, bars, kitchen, and dressing rooms.
SECTION 4 EXISTING ESTABLISHMENTS: All existing establishments operating before the approval of this ordinance and have not complied with its provisions shall be afforded a reasonable period of time to comply subject to the approval of the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative.

--- [Page 26] ---
**Page 26 of 77**

**CHAPTER IX. BACKYARD DOMESTICATED ANIMAL OR COAT AND DOMESTICATED ANIMAL OR FOWL FARM**

**SECTION 1.** The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all backyard domesticated animal or fowl domesticated animal farm such as piggy farms, dairy farms and other similar farms and domesticated fowl farms such as poultry farms, fighting cock breeding farms and other similar fowl farms.

**SECTION 2.** SANITARY REQUIREMENTS. No backyard domesticated farm animal or fowl, except pet animals, shall be reared, bred or raised for commercial purpose within the City Proper, comprising of District A, B, C, D and Agdao. The rearing, stocking and raising of backyard domesticated farm animals or fowls maybe allowed in districts not mentioned herein, provided the following requirements are met:

**2.1. Backyard Domesticated Farm Animal**

**2.1.1. Site Location and Sanitary Requirements**

a. Domesticated farm animals shall not be allowed in subdivisions, residential areas and other densely populated areas;

b. It shall be at least 100 meters away from any food establishments;

c. It shall be kept in a concrete pen with a septic tank or any approved method by the City Health Officer;

d. A sufficient water supply shall be provided to be used in cleaning and maintenance;

e. Solid waste shall be disposed of in a sanitary manner subject to the approval of the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative.

**2.2. Backyard Domesticated Fowl.** It shall comply with Section 2. Sub-section 2.1.1. (b), (c), (d) and (e) of this Chapter

**2.3. Domesticated Animal Farms**

**2.3.1. Sanitary Permit.** No person shall operate any establishments as described herein unless a Sanitary Permit issued by the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative has been secured.

**2.3.2. Sanitary Inspection Clearance.** A Sanitary Inspection Clearance issued by the City Health Officer upon the recommendation of the Rural Sanitation Inspector and Rural Health Physician concerned shall be secured before a sanitary permit to operate is issued.

**2.3.3. Health Certificate.** No person shall be allowed to work in these establishments unless a Health Certificate issued by the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative has been secured and shall be in accordance with Section 3, Chapter II of the Ordinance.

**2.3.4. Other Requirements**

a. A resolution approved by the Barangay Council where such farms are located, allowing the establishment of such farms.

--- [Page 27] ---
Page 27 of 77

h A location or zoning clearance of the site of such farms shall be secured from the City Zoning Office.

2.3.5 Sanitary Facilities Requirements

2.3.5.1 Liquid Waste Treatment Facilities

a. A liquid waste treatment facility for the operation of domesticated animal farms shall be provided (e.g., lagoons, liquid waste treatment plant or the use of bio-gas technology).

b. The facility shall be capable of treating the flow of liquid waste discharge from such farms.

c. Approved plans and specifications of such facilities and a copy of the authority to construct from the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) should be submitted.

d. The effluent from such treatment facilities shall meet the standards formulated by the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR). DENR shall not be allowed to bypass the plants in any manner.

e. No person shall operate such facilities unless a sanitary permit has been secured from the City Health Office.

2.3.5.2 Solid Waste Management. It shall be in accordance with Chapter XII of this Ordinance.

2.3.5.3 Vermin Abatement Program. An annual abatement program shall be in accordance with Section 3, Sub-section 3.4, Chapter XV of this Ordinance.

2.3.5.4 Toilet Facilities. An adequate number of toilet facilities (or male and female) shall be provided.

2.3.5.5 Water Supply. An adequate potable water supply shall be provided.

2.3.5.6 Site Location

a. Farm shall be preferably located in a rolling terrain.

b. It shall not be located in flood prone areas and other environments of water supply.

c. It shall be located at least 100 meters away from any built-up areas such as food establishments, commercial, residential, industrial, and industrial areas.

d. It shall be located at least 1,000 meters away from any major roads or highways.

e. It shall be located 500 meters away from any major roads or highways.

2.4 Domesticated Fowl Farms. The same with the requirements for domesticated animal farms under Section 2, Sub-section 2.3 of this Chapter.

SECTION 2. EXISTING DOMESTICATED ANIMAL OR FOWL FARMS: Existing farms as herein described operating before the approval of this ordinance, and have not complied with its provisions, shall be afforded a reasonable period of time to comply subject to the approval of the City Health Office or his duly authorized representative.

--- [Page 28] ---
**Page 28 of 77**

**CHAPTER X: CONSTRUCTION SITES, TRANSIENT SHOWS AND PUBLIC GATHERINGS**

**SECTION 1:** The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all construction sites, transient shows such as circuses, carnivals, expositions, exhibits, fairs held outdoor and public gatherings such as assemblies, meetings, conventions, religious and non-religious rallies held outdoor or in any other open private or public places.

**SECTION 2:** SANITARY REQUIREMENTS

**2.1:** Temporary Sanitary Permit: No person having control or authority over any activities described herein shall be allowed to operate or undertake such activities unless a temporary sanitary permit issued by the City Health Officer has been secured.

**2.2:** Temporary Sanitary Inspection Clearance: A Temporary Sanitary Inspection Clearance issued by the City Health Officer upon the recommendation of the Rural Sanitation Inspector and Rural Health Physician concerned shall be secured before a Temporary Sanitary Permit to operate is issued.

**2.3:** Temporary Sanitary Facilities Requirements

**2.3.1:** Construction Sites

**2.3.1.1:** Temporary Toilet Facilities

a) The toilet facilities shall be preferably of portable type. If such type is to be used, the contents therein shall be disposed of in a sanitary manner in accordance with Section 3, Chapter IV of this Ordinance.

b) All other types of toilet facilities to be used shall be subject to the approval of the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative and the number of toilet bowls and urinals shall be as follows:

| **No. of Persons** | **No. of Bowls** | **No. of Urinals** | **No. of Lavatory** |
|------------------|-----------------|-------------------|--------------------|
| M F               |                  |                   |                    |
| 1 - 29            | 1               | 1                 | 1                  |
| 30 - 49           | 1               | 1                 | 2                  |
| 50 - 99           | 2               | 2                 | 3                  |

Note additional one urinal for fixture unit for each additional fifty (50) employees.

**2.3.1.2:** Temporary Drinking Water and Drainage Facilities: A drinking fountain of approved angle jet type shall be provided. There should be one (1) drinking fountain for every 30 employees. There should be an adequate drainage facility for liquid waste.

**2.3.1.3:** Solid Waste Disposal Facilities: It shall be in accordance with Chapter XII of this Ordinance.

--- [Page 29] ---
2.3.14. Vermin Abatement Program: It shall be in accordance with Section 3, Sub-section 3.4, Chapter XV of this Ordinance.
2.3.15. Other Requirements:
a. Adequate rest rooms and mess halls for the use of construction workers and other employees shall be provided.
b. Sufficient and appropriate type of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) shall be provided for each construction worker.
c. The construction site shall be fenced and any unauthorized persons shall not be allowed to enter within the construction site.
d. Vertical construction activities shall be well shielded or screened with nets to prevent the dissipation of dust and falling debris or materials which are hazardous to construction workers and the passers-by outside and within the construction site.
e. Excavation and construction equipment, machineries, and tools shall not emit excessive noise and shall only be operated on the prescribed period of time as provided in Chapter XVI of this Ordinance.
f. An emergency first aid box adequately provided shall be located in strategic locations within the construction sites.
2.3.2 Transient Entertainment Shows:
2.3.2.1 All sanitary facilities requirements, the same with construction sites.
2.3.2.2 All food and drinking establishments located within these transient entertainment shows shall be in accordance with Chapter XV of this Ordinance.
2.3.3 Public Gatherings:
2.3.3.1 Toilet Facilities: They shall be in accordance with Section 3, Chapter IV.
SECTION 3. EXISTING CONSTRUCTION SITES: All existing construction sites operating before the approval of this Ordinance shall have not complied with its provisions shall be afforded a reasonable period of time to comply subject to the approval of the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative.

--- [Page 30] ---
**Page 30 of 77**

**CHAPTER XI: LARGE AND MEDIUM SCALE FOOD AND DRINK MANUFACTURING AND PROCESSING ESTABLISHMENTS**

SECTION 1: The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all large and medium scale food and drink manufacturing and processing establishments such as bottling plants, dairies, breweries, ice plants, canning plants, poultry dressing and processing plants, seed and meat product processing plants, corn feed, flour and rice mills and other similar industrial establishments.

SECTION 2: SANITATION REQUIREMENTS

2.1. Sanitary Permit: Any person who shall operate any large and medium scale food and drink processing or manufacturing establishments shall secure a Sanitary Permit issued by the City Health Officer upon the recommendation of the Chief of the Sanitation Section before its operation.

2.2. Sanitary Inspection Clearance: A Sanitary Inspection Clearance shall be secured from the City Health Officer upon the recommendation of the Rural Sanitation Inspector and the Rural Health Physician concerned before the issuance of a Sanitary Permit to operate.

2.3. Health Certificate: No person shall be employed in any food processing or manufacturing establishment without first securing a Health Certificate issued by the City Health Office and shall be in accordance with Section 3, Sub-sections 3.1, 3.3, and 3.4, Chapter II of this ordinance.

SECTION 3: SANITARY FACILITIES REQUIREMENTS

3.1. Liquid Waste and Air Pollution Management: The following are the sanitary facilities requirements for liquid waste treatment plants and air pollution control devices or facilities:

3.1.1. All large and medium scale food and drink processing or manufacturing establishments shall be provided with a liquid waste treatment facilities and/or air pollution control devices.

3.1.2. Effluents and/or emissions from such treatment plants or facilities should pass the standards of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR).

3.1.3. The District Health Officer/City Health Officer shall be informed in case of breakdown or improper functioning of the treatment facilities and control devices.

3.1.4. The waste water treatment plants or facilities and/or air pollution control devices shall be managed by an accredited pollution control officer in accordance with the requirements of DENR Administrative Order (I(A)) No. 56, series of 1992.

3.1.5. No Sanitary Permit shall be issued for these establishments unless copy of approved Environmental Compliance Certificate (ECC) or Certificate of Non-Coverage (CNC) and Permit to Operate (P.O.) issued by the DENR shall have been furnished the City Health Officer.

3.1.6. All sewage shall not be allowed to bypass the plant in any manner.

--- [Page 31] ---
3.1 I shall conform with other requirements specified in Section 2 Sub-section 2.2 (2) (1) to (2) (b), Chapter XX of this Ordinance.

SECTION 4. OTHER REQUIREMENTS: Other sanitary facilities requirements not provided in any Chapter of this Ordinance shall, if applicable, be adopted subject to the approval of the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative.

SECTION 5. EXISTING ESTABLISHMENTS: Existing large and medium scale food processing or manufacturing establishments and other industrial establishments which have not met or complied with Section 2 of this Chapter before the approval of this Ordinance, shall be afforded a reasonable period of time, subject to the approval of the City Health Officer upon the recommendation of the Rural Health Physician concerned after the evaluation and assessment of the Rural Sanitation Inspector.

--- [Page 32] ---
**Page 52 of 77**

**CHAPTER XIII: SOLID WASTE SEGREGATION AND STORAGE IN ANY BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS AND HOUSEHOLDS PENDING COLLECTION**

**SECTION I: MINIMUM STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS**

No business establishment shall be issued a Sanitary Permit and Sanitation Inspection Clearance unless the following minimum standards and requirements for sanitary segregation and storage of solid waste pending collection and final disposal shall have been met and complied with:

1.1 Minimum Standards and Requirements of Containers Used

1.1.1 Every business establishment shall segregate their solid waste into biodegradable and non-biodegradable waste.

1.1.2 A separate container for each type of waste shall be provided.

1.1.3 The solid waste container shall be painted with a particular color identifying the waste or lined with color-coded plastic bags.

1.1.4 The solid waste container must be properly marked for on-site collection as "BIODEGRADABLE WASTE" or "NON-BiodeGRADABLE WASTE".

1.1.5 The solid waste container shall be sufficient in number and with a tight closing lid and shall be located at all designated collection points of the establishment.

1.2 Color standard requirements for solid waste storage pending collection and final disposal

1.2.1 Standard Color Coding for Solid Waste Storage

a) Black - for storage of non-biodegradable general waste,

b) Green - for storage of biodegradable general waste.

1.2.2 No unsegregated garbage shall be collected for final disposal.

1.2.3 All garbage vehicles shall be of closed-body type to prevent foul odor, or if open-side, shall be appropriately covered to prevent waste materials from being blown or strewn during transport.

--- [Page 33] ---
3.1.2 Toilet Facilities:
3.1.2.1 All lobbies operated for public use in every floor of these establishments shall be provided with accessible toilet facilities for each sex and for use of disabled persons.
3.1.2.2 Number of water closet, urinals and hand washing lavatories shall be as follows:

| no. of water closet | no. of urinals | no. of hand washing |
|---------------------|---------------|------------------|
| M                   | F             | M                |
| 2                   | 2             | 1                |

3.2 Hallways
3.2.1 Solid Waste Management: All hallways in every floor of a hotel, motel, lodging house, and condominium shall be provided with solid waste receptacle.
3.2.1.1 At least two (2) refuse receptacles or containers, one (1) for biodegradable and one (1) for non-biodegradable wastes.
3.2.1.2 It shall be located in every 25 meters distance of the entire length of such hallways.
3.2.1.3 It shall be made of impervious materials with light-fitting lids or swing covers and venting proof.
3.2.1.4 It shall be lined with black colored trash bags for non-biodegradable and green colored trash bags for non-biodegradable waste.

3.3 Function or Conference Rooms
3.3.1 Solid Waste Management: All function and conference rooms within these establishments shall be provided with solid waste receptacles or containers.
3.3.1.1 It shall conform with Section 3, Sub-section 3.2.1, (3.2.1.1), (3.2.1.2), (3.2.1.3), and (3.2.1.4) of this Chapter.

SECTION 4. EXISTING ESTABLISHMENTS: Existing establishments as herein described which have been inspected and found in compliance with the specific requirements provided hereunder before the approval of this Ordinance, shall be afforded a reasonable period of time, subject to the approval of the City Health Officer upon the recommendation of the Rural Sanitation Inspector and the Rural Health Physician concerned, to comply with such requirements.

--- [Page 34] ---
**Page 33 of 77**

**CHAPTER XIII INDIVIDUAL HOUSEHOLD EXCRETA AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL FACILITIES**

**SECTION 1: INDIVIDUAL HOUSEHOLD EXCRETA DISPOSAL FACILITIES**

1.1. All individual household without an approved excreta disposal system shall be required to construct such facility.

1.2. The privy recommended for use is the sanitary privy. It shall conform to the following minimum requirements:

1.2.1. It shall consist of an earthen pit which sides maybe lined with concrete materials, a floor covering the pit which shall be made of concrete, and a plastic or concrete water sealed bowl.

1.2.2. It shall be so constructed that it shall be completely free from insects and rodents.

1.2.3. The width shall be at least one meter square and the depth of the pit shall not be less than six (6) feet.

1.2.4. The vent pipe or vent pipe must be at least above the roof of the house with a valve.

1.2.5. A suitable enclosure shall be constructed to provide comfort and privacy to users.

1.3. If other type of privy shall be used other than the sanitary privy, it shall only be allowed or permitted when:

1.3.1. The availability of water supply is very scarce or limited in such areas;

1.3.2. Such type of privy is subject to the approval of the City Health Officer upon the recommendation of the Rural Health Physician or his duly authorized representative and the Rural Sanitation Inspector and shall be subjected to the following requirements:

a) It shall consist of an earthen pit which sides maybe lined with any wood materials, a wooden floor covering the pit with a hole in the center with cover and provided with a seal riser and cover.

b) A receptacle or container with handle and cover for the storage ofving materials shall be provided and,

c) It shall be so constructed so that it shall be free from flies, insects and rodents with a suitable enclosure constructed to provide comfort and privacy to users.

**SECTION 2: INDIVIDUAL HOUSEHOLD SEWAGE DISPOSAL FACILITY**

2.1. All individual household without a sewage disposal system will be required to construct such facility.

2.2. It shall conform with the following minimum requirements:

2.2.1. It shall be of an approved type and design.

2.2.2. Only liquid household waste shall be discharged in such disposal facility.

--- [Page 35] ---
SECTION 3. LIMITATIONS: All existing houses already occupied before the approval of this ordinance and which have not complied with its provisions shall be afforded a reasonable period of time to comply subject to the approval of the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative.

--- [Page 36] ---
**Page 35 of 77**

**CHAPTER XIV: HOTELS, MOTELS, APARTMENTS, CONDOMINIUMS AND DODGING HOUSES**

SECTION 1. The provisions of this Chapter shall be applicable to all hotels, motels, apartments, condominiums and lodging houses, such as inns, lodges, cabins, colleges, teahouses, cabarets, pension houses, hostels and all other similar establishments not classified as hotel by the Department of Tourism, including its swimming pool and employees therein. All applicants for hotels shall specify in their application the number of persons their establishments can accommodate.

SECTION 2. SANITARY REQUIREMENTS:

2.1. Sanitary Permit. No person shall operate any establishments as provided herein unless a sanitary permit issued by the City Health Officer had been secured.

2.2. Sanitary Inspection Clearance. A Sanitary Inspection Clearance issued by the City Health Officer upon the recommendation of the Rural Sanitation Inspector and the Rural Health Physician concerned shall be secured before a sanitary permit to operate is issued.

2.3. Health Certificate. No person shall be allowed to work in these establishments unless a Health Certificate issued by the City Health Officer had been secured and shall be in accordance with Section 3, Chapter II of this Ordinance.

SECTION 3. STANDARD FACILITIES REQUIREMENTS:

3.1. Lobby

3.1.1. Drinking Water Facilities. All lobbies operated for public use in every floor of these establishments shall be provided with drinking water facilities.

3.1.1.1. If water cooling equipment is installed and used for the dispensing of drinking water, it shall be of a type in which ice does not come in contact with water or any type provided; it shall be of approved design.

3.1.1.2. If drinking fountains are provided, they shall be of approved angle-jet type.

3.1.1.3. If drinking water containers are used, they shall be provided with single-service disposable cups. If drinking glasses are used, they shall be:

a. washed thoroughly every after use;

b. subjected to approved bactericidal treatment;

c. stored and handled in a sanitary manner before being given to succeeding persons or guests;

d. it shall be individually wrapped in a sanitary table napkin;

e. in case bottled drinking water is served to guests, it shall come from approved source in accordance with the Department of Health Administrative Order No. 16-A, serious offense, "Failure to Serve Bottled Drinking Water" and shall be dispensed only from the original container filled by the supplier. It shall be served in its original sealed container.

--- [Page 37] ---
**Page 37 of 77**

**CHAPTER XV. CLASSIFICATION OF UPGRADING OF FOOD AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS**

**SECTION 1.** The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all food and drinking establishments such as restaurants, coffee shops, bakeries, canteens, small scale food and drinking processing and manufacturing establishments, bistros, cauderies, fast foods, refreshments, palets, snacks, kitchentites, bars, food catering establishments, night spots, grocery stores, supermarkets, including those that are located within the premises or premises of shopping complexes or centers, passenger ferries, passenger vessels, passenger ships, cruise terminals, ferry terminals and port passenger terminals including the facilities, vending machines and other food and drinking establishments outside of these establishments and the employees therein.

**SECTION 2.** SANITARY REQUIREMENTS

**2.1.** Sanitary Permit

**2.1.1.** No person shall operate any establishments, facilities and vending machines as herein described unless a sanitary permit issued by the City Health Officer has been secured.

**2.1.2.** Sanitary Permit and Health Certificate of employees in food and drinking establishments, swimming pools and vending machines located within passenger vessels or ships shall be secured from the Davao City Health Office when:

a) such passenger vessels or ships travel to and from the major ports of Davao City with a period of destination for not less than once every (2) weeks and shall dock at or in such major ports for more than two (2) hours;

b) the shipping company owning or representing such passenger vessel makes Davao City one of its major bases of operations and that a business permit is required for such operations.

**2.1.** Carriery Inspection Clearance. A Sanitary Inspection Clearance issued by the City Health Officer upon the recommendation of the RSI and the RHP concerned shall be secured before a Sanitary Permit to Operate is issued.

**2.2.** Health Certificate. No person shall be allowed to work in these establishments, facilities and vending machines unless a Health Certificate issued by the City Health Officer has been secured and shall be in accordance with Section 3. Chapter II of this Ordinance.

**2.3.** Transfer Permit

**2.3.1.** All highly perishable food, food products or any articles of food shall not be allowed or permitted to be transported outside of Davao City unless a Transfer Permit has been secured from the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative. The Transfer Permit shall only be issued after the following requirements have been met:

**2.3.1.1.** Inspection and verification of the food or food products, as to its quality and perishability, by the RSI and RHP concerned will be by the Chief of the Sanitation Section; and,

--- [Page 38] ---
2.3.1.2 The president's transfer permit fee shall have been paid to the amount to be set and approved through an ordinance passed by the City Council. Provided, however, that the foregoing requirements are only necessary when the highly perishable food or food products are in transit or transported with the territorial jurisdiction of Davenport City and will be transported to any point of destination outside of Davenport City.

2.3.2 All highly perishable food, food products or any articles of food processed or manufactured outside of Davenport City shall not be allowed or permitted to be transported within Davenport City, unless such food, food products or articles of food are accompanied with a Transfer Permit duty approved by the City, Provincial or Municipal Health Officer concerned where such food and food products originates and shall be subject to inspection, verification and laboratory examination conducted by the City Health Officer of Davenport City or his duly authorized representative.

2.4 Requirements regarding Food Handlers and Other Personnel:

2.4.1 All food handlers and other personnel shall, at their own expense, undergo a Food Handlers Seminar conducted by the City Health Office.

2.4.2 Food and Drinking Establishments are required to undergo a Food Handlers Seminar to be conducted by the City Health Office (CHO) at their own expense. The frequency of Food Handlers Seminars shall be determined by the City Health Office with the recommendation of Rural Sanitation Inspector upon the approval of the Rural Health Physician.

SECTION 3 SPECIFIC SANITARY REQUIREMENTS: The following are the specific sanitary requirements for food and drinking establishments located within the premises or perimeter of ports, post passenger terminals, airport, airport passenger terminals, mail, shopping complexes, bus terminal/ stations/stops and rest areas, and fish ports, and other food and drinking establishments located outside of these establishments:

3.1 Toilet Facilities:

3.1.1 All food and drinking establishments located within the premises or perimeter of these establishments herein described shall all be required to construct or provide toilet facilities for their customers or patrons when all the following conditions exist:

a. When the seating capacity for dine-in customers or patrons of such food and drinking establishments are more than twenty (20) persons; and,

b. Is located more than twenty-five (25) meters radius from the nearest toilet facilities provided by the establishments where they are located; and,

3.1.2 These shall be in accordance with the I.R.R. on Food Establishments of P.D. 1956

3.2 Liquid Waste Management: All sewage or liquid waste discharged from these food and drinking establishments shall be disposed of in a public sewerage system or in the absence thereof, in any of the following methods:

--- [Page 39] ---
3.2.1 Septic Tank: The design, specifications, and location shall have the approval of the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative.
3.2.2 Waste Water Treatment Method or Facilities: An approved waste water treatment method or facilities shall be provided as determined and approved by the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative.
3.2.3 Grease Trap: A grease trap of an approved design as determined by the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative shall be provided or used and where practicable be placed outside of the food and drinking establishments.
3.3 Drinking Water Supply:
3.3.1 Drinking water supply shall be adequate and palatable and in accordance with the Philippine National Standard for Drinking Water.
3.3.2 Drinking water supply in passenger vessels shall be in accordance with pertinent provisions of Section 8, (b) "Drinking Water in Vessels," Chapter II of P.D. 856.
3.4 Vermin Abatement Program:
3.4.1 All food and drinking establishments owners, operators, and administrators shall maintain a vermin abatement program. If they fail, neglect, or refuse to maintain a vermin abatement program, the City Health Office shall undertake the work at their own expense.
3.4.2 All food and drinking establishments owners, operators, and administrators shall submit an annual vermin abatement plan or contract from a OCH-accredited pest control operator establishment as prerequisite to the issuance or renewal of their respective sanitary permits.
SECTION 4 CLASSIFICATION OR UPGRAADING OF FOOD AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS: All food and drinking establishments which had complied or met any class requirements as provided in the succeeding section of these food and drinking establishments which have a percentage rating of not less than fifty percent (50%) after inspection by the City Health Inspector under Section II of this Ordinance, may apply for a classification or upgrading as the case may be.
4.1 The application for classification or upgrading shall be filed with the City Health Office.
4.2 Upon payment of the Food and Drinking Establishment Classification or Upgrading Fee, the amount to be set and determined through a City Health Inspector, the City Health Officer through the Rural Sanitation Inspector and Rural Health Physician concerned shall:
4.2.1 Cause the classification or upgrading of the food and drinking establishments within seven (7) days after payment;
4.2.2 And shall subsequently issue the appropriate classification placard (see attached samples of the establishment).

--- [Page 40] ---
**Page 40 of 77**

**SECTION 5: COMPLIATORY REQUIREMENTS FOR CLASSES A, B AND C RESTAURANTS/FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS**

**5.1 Class "A"**

**5.1.1 The percentage rating shall not be lower than ninety percent (90%) or sanitation standard rating or excellent.**

**5.1.2 A minimum seating capacity of fifty (50) persons.**

**5.1.3 Tables shall be covered with cloth.**

**5.1.4 Freshly laundered table napkins shall be provided for every customer.**

**5.1.5 The area of the room used exclusively for dining shall not be less than 1.11 sq. m. (12 sq ft) per customer per place.**

**5.1.6 The floor area of the dining room shall be completely covered with high grade quality carpet or any suitable floor coverage, subject to the approval of the City Health Officer.**

**5.1.7 A suitable lounge, reception room or foyer well furnished to seat not less than one sixth (1/6) of the maximum number of customers shall be provided for customers who remain in the premises of such restaurants for more than one hour.**

**5.1.8 Lunch shall be provided of not less than five (5) days in each week and dinner of not less than six (6) days in each week, between the following minimum hours:**

- Lunch: 12:00 noon and 2:30 p.m.

- Dinner: 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 p.m.

**5.1.9 Air conditioning of at least the dining area. Air conditioning facility shall be cleaned and disinfected every three (3) months.**

**5.2 Class "B"**

**5.2.1 The percentage rating shall not be lower than seventy percent (70%) or a sanitation standard rating of very satisfactory.**

**5.2.2 A minimum seating capacity of thirty (30) persons.**

**5.2.3 The same as Sub-sections 5.1.3, 5.1.4, 5.1.5, 5.1.7, 5.1.8 and 5.1.9 of this Section, and this Chapter.**

**5.2.4 Recommended - Sub-section 5.1.6 of this Section, and this Chapter.**

**5.3 Class "C"**

**5.3.1 The percentage rating shall not be lower than fifty percent (50%) or a satisfaction standard rating of satisfactory.**

--- [Page 41] ---
**Page 41 of 77**

**SECTION 6. HOLDING PENS, SLAUGHTERING AND ROASTING OF ANIMALS IN LECHON HOUSES, ESTABLISHMENTS OR PERSONS ENGAGED IN SLAUGHTERING AND ROASTING SERVICES AND FOOD AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS**

**6.1 Holding Pens**

**6.1.1 No holding pen for the temporary confinement of livestock shall be located within the premises of such food and drinking establishments including its perimeter.**

**6.1.2 All holding pens shall be located outside of the City Proper as herein described and.**

**6.1.3 It shall be in accordance with Section 2, Chapter IX of this Ordinance.**

**6.2 Slaughtering, Roasting and Cooking**

**6.2.1 No slaughtering and roasting activities shall be undertaken by food and drinking establishments within the premises or perimeter of their establishments or houses, or within the City Proper for commercial purpose.**

**6.2.2 Commercial slaughtering shall only be done or undertaken in slaughterhouses or abattoirs approved by the City Health Officer.**

**6.2.3 Wood, crop residues, animal dung and other forms of biomass shall not be used in any food and drinking establishments for cooking, roasting and/or heating fuels unless the establishment has a satisfactory ventilation system.**

**6.2.4 Unprocessed solid fuels like wood or coal shall not be used in establishments even if they satisfy the ventilation requirements.**

**6.2.5 Open fire cooking, roasting and barbecuing in streets, sidewalks, and other crowded areas shall not be permitted.**

**6.2.6 Cooking, roasting and barbecuing areas of food and drinking establishments shall be provided with smoke receiving enclosures and chimneys or smoke stocks properly located so as not to cause smoke pollution among the customers and other people.**

**SECTION 7 EXISTING ESTABLISHMENTS AND FACILITIES**

Existing establishments and facilities operating before the approval of this Ordinance and which have not complied with its provisions shall be afforded a reasonable period of time to comply subject to the approval of the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative.

**SECTION 8 AMBULANT FOOD TRADE**

Any person engaged in the operation of any ambulant food trade shall comply with the provisions contained in the Department of Health Administrative Order regarding ambulant food vendors which is hereby made part of the provision of this Chapter.

--- [Page 42] ---
Page 42 of 77

CHAPTER XVI. ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES

SECTION I The provisions of this Chapter shall be applicable to all establishments, projects, plants, industrial facilities and premises which may or create or produce nuisances such as objectionable odors or excessive noise and other specific types of nuisances, including but not limited to manufacturing, producing, handling, storing, transporting, selling, using, distributing, disposing, drying, maintaining and other processes, activities or undertakings which are likely or may create or produce nuisances, such as, but not limited to:

1 Objectionable Odor Emitted or In Manning From:

1.1 A defective sanitary or unsanitary toilet facility

1.2 The effluents of septic tank improperly discharged.

1.3 Defective waste water treatment plant or facilities.

1.4 The treated, partially treated or untreated discharged liquid waste coming from waste water treatment plant or facilities, business establishments and households.

1.5 Animal or fowl enclosures, pens, stockade used for keeping, raising and breeding.

1.6 The drying and storing of any manure, waste or any food or non-food articles.

1.7 The chemicals or raw materials used in the processing or manufacturing of any products.

1.8 The flames of chemicals or paints used in battery and automotive -charging and repair shops, metal and steel welding shops, gold smiths and other similar shops.

1.9 The spraying of any insecticides, pesticides and other toxic or hazardous chemicals.

1.10 Uncollected uncovered garbage refuse containers, or.

1.11 Any activity where objectionable odor is being emitted.

2 Excessive Noise

2.1 All persons exposed to noise which exceeds the maximum allowable noise levels emanating within any construction site, establishment or premises such as those emitted from certain equipment, machinery, vehicle, tools, appliances or devices or necessary for the operation thereof, shall use such means meets the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) S.I. 4-1974 or other specifications accepted by the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (D.E.N.R.) shall be abated by the City Health Officer within thirty (30) days after receiving notice from the owner or operator of whom a notice has been prescribed by the City Health Officer.

2.2 The maximum allowable noise quality standard shall be as follows:

--- [Page 43] ---
**Page 43 of 77**

**TABLE I**

**MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE NOISE LEVELS IN GENERAL AREAS**

(in decibels)

| Category | Day Time | Morning and Evening | Night Time |
|----------|----------|----------------------|-----------|
| Area      |          |                      |           |
| AA        | 50 dB    | 45 dB                | 40 dB     |
| A         | 55 dB    | 50 dB                | 45 dB     |
| B         | 65 dB    | 60 dB                | 55 dB     |
| C         | 70 dB    | 65 dB                | 60 dB     |
| D         | 75 dB    | 70 dB                | 65 dB     |

**1.2.3 Classification of General Areas:**

1.2.3.1 Class AA - a section or contiguous area which requires quietness such as area within 100 meters from school sites, nursery schools, hospitals, special homes for the aged and other health care institutions and places of worship.

1.2.3.2 Class A - a section or contiguous area that is primarily used for residential purposes.

1.2.3.3 Class B - a section or contiguous area that is primarily used for commercial purposes.

1.2.3.4 Class C - a section that is primarily reserved as a light industrial area.

1.2.3.5 Class D - a section that is primarily reserved as a heavy industrial area.

**1.2.4 For purposes of this Ordinance, the division of the 24-hour period are as follows:**

1.2.4.1 Morning: 5:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m.
1.2.4.2 Day Time: 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.
1.2.4.3 Evening: 6:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m.
1.2.4.4 Night Time: 10:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m.

**1.2.5 All employees of light, medium, and heavy industrial establishments shall be provided with sufficient and appropriate Personal Protective Equipment (PPEE).**

**1.2.6 All noise shall be measured from the perimeter of the establishments, buildings, or premises where the complaints of such noise reside or usually stay during the period provided in sub-section 1.2.4 of this Chapter.**

**1.3 Other specific types of nuisance which are the subject of complaint that may jeopardize or pose hazard to public health, sanitation, and safety:**

1.3.1 Animals permitted to graze near streets or vacant lots;

1.3.2 Birds and pet animals in cages (or not) in food establishments;

1.3.3 Indiscriminate disposal of dead animals and garbage in bodies or water of its streets;

1.3.4 Discharge of untested effluents;

--- [Page 44] ---
1.3.5. Clogged drainage canals;
1.3.6. Stagnant water in low places;
1.3.7. Presence of burrows;
1.3.8. Dirty premises;
1.3.9. Presence of containers or any materials which tend to hold water in any premises;
1.3.10. Accumulation of refuse or garbage in any places;
1.3.11. Discharged of chemical and other noxious wastes in canals/ streets/bodies of water/vacant lot;
1.3.12. Sprinkling streets with canal water;
1.3.13. Rice husks and other similar articles which maybe blown by wind;
1.3.14. Public streets sidewalks and shoulders used as vending areas;
1.3.15. Glare from welding shops and other repair shops which are openly exposed to the public;
1.3.16. Exhaust gases, dust, fumes, vapors and smoke from motor vehicles, appliances, other devices or equipment, charcoal (coke);
1.3.17. The use of any streets, shoulders and sidewalks for car washing, for repair of vehicles, as driving area or as playground or basketball court;
1.3.18. Any structure, fence, defensive equipment, machineries or vehicles which differ or unattended on streets, shoulders and sidewalks and which obstructs the normal flow of traffic and the convenient passage of the walking public;
1.3.19. Any edifice or structures declared as "confined" by proper authorities left idle or unattended;
1.3.20. Dwelling and commercial structures along and above waterways.
SECTION 2. INSPECTION/INVESTIGATION AND ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES:
2.1. Procedure: Upon receipt of a written or verbal complaint regarding a nuisance by the City Health Officer or District Health Office, the City Health Officer through the Rural Sanitation Inspector and the Rural Health Physician concerned shall conduct an inspection or investigation of the premises of the establishment where such nuisance en masse is or is being emitted.
2.1.1. within three (3) days;
2.1.2. a copy of the letter complaint shall be furnished the respondent;
2.1.3. The Rural Sanitation Inspector concerned shall physically verify the complaint to determine its veracity and update the Rural Health Physician concerned.

--- [Page 45] ---
2.14. The Rural Sanitation Inspector and the Rural Health Physician concerned shall submit to the City Health Officer a report of their inspection/investigation.

2.15. Issuance of Sanitary Orders for the Abatement of nuisances shall be in accordance with the procedure provided in Chapter III of this Ordinance.

SECTION 3. INSTITUTION OF CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS BY PRIVATE AGGREGATED PERSONS: Any private aggrieved person, however, may elect to institute criminal proceedings against parties that cause nuisance.

3.1 A person or group of persons who may be affected by a nuisance may file his/her/their complaint with their Rural Health Physician as provided for under Article 700 of the Civil Code.

3.2. After inspection/investigation by the R.S.I. and the R.H.P., concerned, and upon acquisition of evidence to warrant it, the R.H.P. together with the R.S.I. concerned may, on behalf of the complainant or complainants, file the complaint with the Local Prosecutor's Office.

3.3. Thereafter and as provided for under the Rules of Court, and if the prosecutor concerned after conducting an investigation, finds probable cause thereof, a case shall then be filed in the proper court.

SECTION 4. CLOSURE OF ESTABLISHMENTS, PREMISES OR FACILITIES: Any nuisance emitted or emanating from the operation, processes, activities or undertakings of any establishment, premises or facility, which has persisted despite all available corrective measures, have continuously persisted and in the judgment of the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative, such nuisance have become or constitutes a significant risk or danger to the health, sanitation and safety of an individual, family, group or community, and the Rural Sanitation Inspector and the R.S.I. and R.H.P. concerned or by the Chief of the Sanitation Section shall recommend to the Local Health Authority the immediate closure of such establishments, premises or facilities subject to the provisions of Section 4, Chapter III of this Ordinance.

--- [Page 46] ---
**Page 46 of 77**

**CHAPTER XVII: RELOCATION AND OBTAINING OF SITES**

**SECTION I: SITE Requirements**

1.1. The site shall be in accordance with the designated land use of the City of Davao.

1.2. The area of the site shall be capable of accommodating the various facilities to be constructed (roads, health centers, housing units, drainage canals, etc.).

1.3. The site shall not be located in flood prone areas, other sources of pollution, and other environmentally critical areas.

1.4. It shall be accessible from any major roads or highways.

1.5. It shall not be located within any path of immediate (5 to 10 years) urban and industrial expansion.

1.6. It shall not be located near airports.

**SECTION II: HOUSING AND LOT REQUIREMENTS**

2.1. Individual lot area for every family of five (5) shall not be less than eighty (80) square meters (sq. m.).

2.2. A minimum of twenty-five (25) square meters (sq. m.) of floor area for every housing unit shall be provided.

**SECTION III: SANITARY FACILITIES REQUIREMENTS**

3.1. Water Supply

3.1.1. If the water supply comes from the Davao City Water District (DCWD), it shall be of sufficient quantity so as to serve the water needs of the resettlement site.

3.1.2. When a public or private water supply source is used or constructed, the operator, owner, or administrator of such water supply system shall:

a. Secure a Drinking Water Site Clearance from the City Health Officer before its construction.

b. Pay the Drinking Water Site Clearance Fee upon application.

3.1.3. When the drinking water used come from a private supplier, the supplier shall:

a. Secure a Drinking Water Site Clearance from the City Health Officer before its construction.

b. Pay the Drinking Water Site Clearance Fee upon application.

3.2. Lighting and Ventilation

3.2.1. A sufficient artificial lighting for each housing unit shall be provided.

--- [Page 47] ---
Page 47 of 77

3.2.2. Adequate natural ventilation shall be provided for each housing unit.

3.3 Toilet Facilities.

3.3.1 Adequate toilet facilities for each housing unit shall be provided.

3.3.2 It shall be in accordance with Section 1, Chapter XIII of this Ordinance.

3.4 Sewage Disposal Facility

3.4.1 A sewage disposal facility shall be provided for each housing unit.

3.4.2 It shall be in accordance with Section 2, Chapter XIII of this Ordinance.

3.5 Refuse Disposal It shall be in accordance with Section 1, Chapter XII of this Ordinance.

SECTION 4. OTHER REQUIREMENTS

4.1 No resettlement or relocation areas or sites shall be open for public use unless the minimum sanitary facilities requirements have been met or complied with.

4.2 A sanitary survey of the site or area shall be conducted by the Rural Sanitation Inspector and the Rural Health Physician concerned before its operation.

--- [Page 48] ---
**Page 48 of 77**

**CHAPTER XVIII: EVACUATION CENTERS OR SITES DURING AND FOLLOWING EMERGENCIES OR DISASTERS**

**SECTION 1:** The provisions of this Chapter shall be applicable to all evacuation centers or sites during and following emergencies or disasters such as fires, floods, epidemics, earthquakes, and other man-made natural calamities.

**SECTION 2:** EMERGENCY SANITATION

**2.1** Sanitary Facilities Requirements

**2.1.1** Toilet and Bathing Facilities

**2.1.1.1** There shall be adequate toilet and bathing facilities. In mass shelters, toilets may be provided on the basis of:

| No. of Persons | No. of Toilet Facility | Bathing Facility |
|----------------|------------------------|-----------------|
| 100             | 6                      | 8               |
| 200             | 12                     | 16              |

**NOTE:** Additional one (1) toilet and bath for each sex for every additional 20 persons.

**2.1.1.2** Such toilet facilities shall conform to Section 1, Chapter XIII of this Ordinance.

**2.1.1.3** If possible, a portable type of toilet facility should be provided. The contents of such types of toilet facility shall be disposed of in accordance with Section 3, Chapter IV of this Ordinance.

**2.2** Drinking Water Supply

**2.2.1** Drinking water supply, if applicable, shall be in accordance with Section 3, Chapter XVII of this Ordinance.

**2.2.2** Where such water supply comes from a doubtful source and no other source is available, emergency treatment must be done, in any of the following manner:

**2.2.2.1** Boiling

a) It is necessary to have the water over the fire for at least three (3) minutes after it has reached the boiling point.

b) The vessel in which the water is boiled must be thoroughly washed before use.

**2.2.2.2** Disinfection or Treatment: Emergency disinfection or treatment of drinking water can be accomplished by the use of various chemicals:

a) Chlorine compounds with large chlorine content (70% available chlorine). See attached procedure for stock solution preparation.

b) Chlorine tablets (tablet form, e.g., aqua tablet). See accompanying instructions.

--- [Page 49] ---
2.2.2.3 Water Tank: If a water tank or container is to be used for the storage of drinking water, it should be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected.
a) Thoroughly cleaned and disinfected.
b) Subjected to immediate water sampling by use of HPC bottle and should be undertaken at intervals deemed necessary.

2.3 Garbage and Refuse Disposal:
2.3.1 Where normal refuse collection system may be disrupted during emergency or where the evacuation site is inaccessible, the following emergency method can be used:
a) Disposal of garbage by burning or burial and covered with tap soil at least six (6) inches thick.
b) A common open dump pits maybe used as a stop gap measure but should be limited to rubbish only and this should be burned daily.

2.3.2 Normal garbage collection should be resumed immediately in accessible areas if possible.

2.4 Insect and Rodent Control:
2.4.1 During and following an emergency or disaster, a rodent and insect control program should be instituted.
2.4.1.1 Fly and Mosquito Control by use of insecticides and larvicides:
a) An approved type of insecticide or larvicide should be used.
b) Adequate supply of insecticides or larvicides should be provided.

2.4.1.2 Rodent Control by use of rodenticides:
a) An approved type of rodenticides should be used.
b) Adequate supply of rodenticides should be provided.

2.4.1.3 Environmental control measures shall always be initiated.

2.4.2 Equipments to be used in spraying or fogging operations:
2.4.2.1 An adequate number of fogging machines for flying insects should be used and provided.
2.4.2.2 An adequate number of hand-pumped compressed air sprayer for lice should be used and provided.

2.4.2.3 Only trained personnel should be allowed to undertake such activities.

--- [Page 50] ---
2.5 Other Requirements

2.5.1 Emergency Housing. Provisions of safe and healthful housing for large number of homeless people in the event of disaster or calamity should be provided.

2.5.1.1 If the evacuation center or site is in schools, it should be capable of accommodating the number of evacuees and if possible will not disrupt classes.

2.5.1.2 If such is not practicable, an adequate number of emergency tents which can accommodate a minimum of ten (10) persons each should be provided.

2.5.1.1 Location or Site Requirements:

a. It should be preferably located on flat grounds.

b. It should not be located in flood prone areas and other critical areas.

c. There should be at least a distance of five (5) meters between tents.

d. It should be accessible to approved water supply sources and sanitary excreta disposal facilities.

2.5.1.3 Persons affected with highly communicable diseases should be separated or isolated in a separate tent or area provided for such purpose.

2.5.2 Food Sources, Food Preparation Areas and Utensils

2.5.2.1 Food and other articles of food should only come from approved sources.

2.5.2.2 Food preparation areas should always be kept clean and free from sources of contamination.

2.5.2.3 Utensils used in cooking and serving should be thoroughly washed every after use.

2.5.3 Inspection and Sanitary Survey. All evacuation centers or sites shall be inspected and surveyed by the Rural Sanitation Inspector and the Rural Health Physicians concerned regularly before its operation, if applicable and during its occupancy.

--- [Page 51] ---
**Page 51 of 77**

**CHAPTER XXI. BUSES AND OTHER PUBLIC UTILITY VEHICLES,**
**PARKING AREAS, BUS TERMINALS, BUS STOPS AND SERVICE STATIONS**

**SECTION I.** The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all areas, bus terminals, bus stops, service stations, passenger buses and other public utility vehicles either government or privately owned including their personnel.

**SECTION 2. SANITARY REQUIREMENTS**

**2.1. Sanitary Permit.** No person shall operate any establishment and facility as herein described unless a Sanitary Permit issued by the City Health Officer upon the recommendation of the Chief of the Sanitation Section has been secured.

**2.2. General Inspection Clearance.** A Sanitary Inspection Clearance issued by the City Health Officer upon the recommendation of the Rural Sanitation Inspector and the Rural Health Physician concerned shall be secured before a Sanitary Permit to Operate is issued.

**2.3. Health Certificate.** No person shall be allowed to work in these establishments as herein described unless a health certificate issued by the City Health Officer is secured and shall be in accordance with Section 3, Chapter II of the Ordinance.

**SECTION 3. SPECIFIC SANITARY REQUIREMENTS**

**3.1. Passenger Buses**

**3.1.1. Capacity.** Buses shall carry only the number of passengers as provided for in their permit.

**3.1.2. Comfortable Seats.** Buses shall be provided with comfortable seats.

**3.1.3. Cleanliness.** All headrests, seat covers, and floors of buses shall be cleaned and disinfected prior to leaving the terminal station from point of origin and after arrival at point of destination if necessary, between bus stops.

**3.1.4. Exhaust Pipes.** Exhaust pipes shall be located in such manner that gas and fumes are prevented from entering the vehicle.

**3.1.5. Refuse Storage and Disposal.** Refuse/garbage receptacles shall be provided:

**3.1.5.1. At both ends and center of the bus.**

**3.1.5.2. Placing signs at conspicuous places, requesting passengers to throw their refuse or garbage into the receptacles provided.**

**3.1.5.3. Disposal of this garbage shall be done at the bus terminal in a manner acceptable to the City Health Office.**

**3.1.5.4. Receptacles shall be made of non-absorbing materials, preferably metal with fitting covers and thoroughly cleaned every time after emptying.**

--- [Page 52] ---
3.14 Carrying of live animals or fowls. Carrying of animals or fowls are strictly prohibited in buses (obnoxious odor).

3.15 Health Certificate. All personnel including the drivers and conductors shall each secure a health certificate before they are permitted to work and shall comply with Section 3, sub-section 3.2 e (i) and (ii), Chapter II of this Ordinance.

3.16 Other Requirements:

3.16.1 A First Aid Emergency Kit shall be provided by the management for each bus.

3.16.2 Sanitary spitting or vomitum bags shall be provided for each passenger.

3.2 Public Utility Jeeps and Tricycles. The same with Section 3, sub-sections (3.1.1), (3.1.2), (3.1.3) and (3.1.5) of this Chapter.

3.3 Tricycles. Tricycle drivers shall not be permitted to drive unless a Health Certificate is secured from the City Health Officer in accordance with Section 3, sub-section 3.2 e (i) and (ii), Chapter II of this Ordinance.

SECTION 4 SANITARY FACILITIES: REQUIREMENTS FOR REST AREAS, BUS TERMINALS, BUS STOPS AND SERVICE STATIONS.

4.1 Toilet and Handwashing Facilities. Sufficient and clean toilet and handwashing facilities for male and female and disabled riding public and personnel shall be provided in properly located areas, and shall be in accordance with Section 4, sub-section 4.5, Chapter XXI of this Ordinance.

4.2 Wider Supply. It shall be in accordance with Section 3, sub-section 3.1, Chapter XVII of this Ordinance

4.3 Solid Waste Management. It shall be in accordance with Chapter XII of this Ordinance.

4.4 Liquid Waste Management. It shall be in accordance with Section 3, Chapter XV of this Ordinance.

4.5 Lighting and Ventilation. It shall be in accordance with Section 4, sub-section 4.3, Chapter XXI of this Ordinance.

4.6 Venom Abatement Program. A venom abatement program shall be maintained and shall be in accordance with Section 3, sub-section 3.4, Chapter XV of this Ordinance.

4.7 Drainage Facilities. Adequate drainage facilities shall be provided.

SECTION 5 EXISTING ESTABLISHMENTS AND PASSENGER BUSES. All existing establishments and buses operating under the approval of this Ordinance and have not complied with the provisions of this Chapter, shall be afforded a reasonable period of time to comply subject to the approval of the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative.

--- [Page 53] ---
**Page 53 of 77**

**CHAPTER XXX MEMORIAL PARK OR CEMETERY, FUNERAL PARLOR OR CHAPEL, MORGUE, Crematorium, Embalming Establishment AND PRIVATE BURIAL GROUND**

SECTION 1: The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all memorial parks, funeral parlors, chapels, morgues, embalming establishments, and private burial grounds or places of enshrinement, including sections initial areas, catacombs and mausoleums owned and operated by the City Government or private persons including the employees therein.

SECTION 2: SUPERVISION AND CONTROL: All establishments or areas herein described shall be under the sanitary supervision and control of the City Health Officer being duly authorized representative of the Local Health Authority in matters of sanitation after their final opening.

SECTION 3: SANITARY REQUIREMENTS

3.1 Sanitary Permit: No person shall operate any establishment or area as herein described without first securing a Sanitary Permit issued by the City Health Officer upon the submission of:

3.1.1. For memorial parks or cemeteries and private burial grounds, a copy of:

3.1.1.1. Initial and Operational Clearance issued by the Regional Health Director;

3.1.1.2. E.C.C. issued by the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR); and,

3.1.1.3. Sanitary Inspection Clearance.

3.1.2. For crematories:

3.1.2.1. Copy of the feasibility study reviewed and approved by the Regional Health Director;

3.1.2.2. E.C.C. or CNC and Permit to Operate issued by the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR); and,

3.1.2.3. Sanitary Inspection Clearance.

3.1.3. For funeral parlors or chapels and morgues:

3.1.3.1. Sanitary Inspection Clearance.

3.2. Sanitary Inspection Clearance: A Sanitary Inspection Clearance shall be issued by the City Health Officer upon the recommendation of the Rural Health Physician and the Sanitary Inspector concerned before a Sanitary Permit to Operate will be issued.

3.3. Health Certificate: No person shall be employed in these establishments unless a Health Certificate issued by the City Health Officer is secured and shall be in accordance with Section 3, Chapter II of the Ordinance.

SECTION 4: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

4.1 Burial of remains of dead persons shall only be done in memorial parks, cemeteries and private burial grounds finally approved by the City Health Officer to open.

--- [Page 54] ---
4.2. Penitent proprietors of the sanitary facilities requirements provided in any chapters of this Ordinance shall be if applicable adopted subject to the approval of the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative.
4.3. No remains or cadavers or a part or parts thereof whether embalmed or unembalmed, shall be disposed of in any way or manner except by burial or cremation.
4.4. Disposal of cremated remains in the sea shall have the approval of the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative.
4.5. During the wake of the All Saints Day owners or administrators of cemeteries and memorial parks shall provide additional toilet facility or facilities as required under the provisions of this Ordinance for use of the visiting relatives of the deceased.
4.5.1. It shall be a portable type of toilet facility.
4.5.2. The number of toilet facilities shall be proportionate to the maximum number of visitors determined by the City Health Officer or is duly authorized representative.
4.6.3. The disposal of the contents of such portable type of toilet facility or facilities shall be in accordance with Section 3. Chapter IV of this Ordinance.
SECTION 5. EXISTING ESTABLISHMENTS. All existing establishments operating before the approval of this Ordinance which have complied with the provisions of the Ordinance shall be offered a reasonable period of time to comply subject to the approval of the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative.
SECTION 6. SPECIFIC PROVISIONS OF FUNERAL AND EMBALMING ESTABLISHMENTS.
6.1. Preservation Tanks in Morgues. Adequate number of tanks for longer preservation periods of unclaimed cadavers shall be provided.
6.1.1. The tank shall be divided into compartments and shall be located in the morgues of these establishments.
6.1.2. Each compartment shall have the following dimensions: length of 2.50 meters, width of 1.50 meters and depth of 2.50 meters.
6.1.3. Every compartment shall be provided with a drain pipe leading into a separate waste water treatment facility from the septic tank.
6.1.4. The cover of each compartment shall be provided with tight fitting lids.
6.2. Burial of Unclaimed Embalmed Cadavers.
6.2.1. No unclaimed embalmed cadavers shall be buried unless a nearest kin of the deceased shall have identified and claimed the cadavers, provided that such cadavers will not be preserved for more than one (1) month.
6.2.2. All unclaimed cadavers preserved for more than one (1) month shall be buried immediately after the necessary documents shall have been complied with and subject to the supervision and approval of the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative.

--- [Page 55] ---
Page 55 of 77

6.2.3 All expenses thereon shall be borne by the City Government of Davao.

6.2.4 If such unclaimed remains be used for medical schools and scientific institutions for studies and research, it shall have the approval of the Regional Health Director as recommended by the City Health Officer.

SECTION 7 SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR MASS BURIAL: In case of calamity, disaster or epidemic where the number of victims could no longer be affected by local authorities or that majority of the remains are already in the present state of decomposition, and where it is impossible to identify the identity of the dead, the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative, such prevailing conditions may pose or constitute a significant threat to public health, the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative shall recommend to the Local Health Authority the mass cremation or burial of such remains subject to the following requirements:

7.1 All remains shall be subject to disinfection prior to burial.

7.2 All remains shall only be buried in approved or duly authorized burial grounds.

7.3 All cremated remains shall be packed in a container and shall be deposited only in approved or duly authorized burial grounds or any other places designated by the City Health Officer for the permanent repository of such cremated remains.

SECTION 8 REQUIREMENTS FOR SIGNING OF DEATH CERTIFICATES:

8.1 Certification of Death:

8.1.1 Death in the hospital shall be certified by the last person who attended the dead.

8.1.2 Death of known cause shall be certified by the Rural Health Physician concerned.

8.1.3 Death of unknown cause shall be certified by the Medico-Legal Officer.

8.2 Affidavit shall be made/execute by the nearest of kin, duly notarized, and certified by the Barangay Captain concerned.

--- [Page 56] ---
**Page 56 of 77**

**CHAPTER 3. MARKETS AND ABATTOIRS OR SLAUGHTERHOUSES**

**SECTION 1.** The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all markets and slaughterhouses or abattoirs owned and operated by the City Government or by private persons.

**SECTION 2.** CONTROL AND SUPERVISION. All establishments as herein provided shall be under the sanitary control and supervision of the City Health Officer in coordination with the Market Master and the Head of the Slaughterhouse concerned.

**SECTION 3.** SANITARY REQUIREMENTS

**3.1.** Markets and Abattoirs or Slaughterhouses. All markets and abattoirs or slaughterhouses including shareholders within the premises of the market shall not be allowed to operate unless a Sanitary Permit issued by the City Health Office has been secured.

**3.2.** Health Certificate. All shareholders including their employees and employees of slaughterhouses shall each secure a Health Certificate issued by the City Health Office before they are allowed to work.

**3.3.** Sanitary Inspection Clearance. A Sanitary Inspection Clearance shall be secured from the City Health Office upon the recommendation of the Rural Sanitation Inspector and Rural Health Physician concerned before a Sanitary Permit to Operate is issued.

**SECTION 4.** SANITARY FACILITIES REQUIREMENTS FOR MARKETS

**4.1.** Water Supply

**4.1.1.** There shall be sufficient supply of safe and potable water in the market either from Davno City Water District (DCWD) or from other approved sources, and shall be in accordance with Section 3, sub-section 3.1.2, Chapter XVIII of the Ordinance.

**4.1.2.** A sufficient running water for cooked food stalls, fish, and meat stalls shall be provided.

**4.1.3.** Sufficient number of water outlets in strategically located areas of the market to allow easy cleaning of the market and its premises shall be provided.

**4.2.** Drainage Facilities. There shall be a sufficient drainage facilities in the market and its premises.

**4.2.1.** One (1) floor drain shall be provided for every 500 sq. ft. of floor area.

**4.2.2.** Slope shall not be less than 7/8 inch per foot to the drainage inlet.

**4.2.3.** Sewer line from toilet and urinals shall not be connected with the drainage canal or line.

**4.2.4.** Pipe diameter for drainage purposes shall not be less than six (6) inches.

**4.3.** Lighting and Ventilation. There shall be adequate lighting and ventilation natural or artificial in all stalls or sections of the market.

--- [Page 57] ---
Page 57 of 11

4.4 Solid Waste Disposal

4.4.1 A sufficient number of garbage/volume receptacles or containers in strategically located areas or for every section or stall shall be provided by the stall owner.

4.4.2 It shall be accordance with Chapter XII of this Ordinance.

4.4.3 A garbage depository for the temporary storage of segregated garbage shall be provided before collection and final disposal.

4.5 Toilet Facilities: Adequate number of toilet facilities approved by the City Health Officer for each sex and disabled person shall be provided as follows:

Table 1

| No. of Person | No. of Bowls | No. of Urinals | No. of Handwashing Lavatory |
|--------------|-------------|---------------|---------------------------|
| M             | 100         | 1             | M                         |
| F             | 100         | 1             | F                         |

Note: (1) one bowl, urinal and handwashing lavatory for each additional 100 males and 50 females.

4.6 Liquid Waste Management: It shall be in accordance with Section 3, Chapter XV of this Ordinance.

4.7 Venom Abatement Program: A Venom Abatement Program shall be numbered and shall be in accordance with Section 3, sub-section 3.4, Chapter XV of this Ordinance.

5.1 OTHER REQUIREMENTS

5.1.1 Holding Pens for Livestock: It shall be in accordance with Section 2, Chapter IX of this Ordinance.

5.2 Cages or Pens for Live Poultry

5.2.1 Cages or pens for live poultry shall be maintained clean at all times and shall only be for such purpose and shall be at least 25 meters away from food stalls.

5.2.2 Slaughtering of live poultry within the premises or perimeter of the market shall be strictly prohibited.

5.3 Slaughterhouses or Abattoirs

5.3.1 Water Supply: The same with Section 4, Sub-section 4.1, (4.1.1), (4.1.2), and (4.1.3)

5.3.2 Drainage and Sewage Treatment Facilities

5.3.2.1 Drainage facilities in slaughtering area shall be in accordance with Section 4, Sub-section 4.2, of this Chapter.

5.3.2.2 Liquid waste or sewage treatment facilities shall be in accordance with Section 3, Chapter XV of this Ordinance.

--- [Page 58] ---
5.3.1 Solid Waste Management: It shall be in accordance with Section 4, Sub-section 4.4 of this Chapter.
5.3.2 Lighting and Ventilation: It shall be in accordance with Section 4, Sub-section 4.5 of this Chapter.
5.3.3 Toilet Facilities: Adequate number of toilet and handwashing facilities shall be provided as follows:
Table 2
| No. of Personnel | Water Closet | Urinal | Wash Hand Basin |
|------------------|--------------|--------|---------------|
| M                | F            |        | M             |
| 1-49             | 2            | 2      | 2             |
| 50-100           | 2            | 2      | 3             |

Note: Additional one (1) fixture for every 50 personnel, and additional (1) one-drinking fountain for every 75 personnel.
5.3.6 Other Requirements for Holding Pens: Holding pens for the temporary confinement of livestock slaughterhouses or abattoirs shall be in accordance with Section 2, Chapter IX of this Ordinance.
SECTION 6 EXISTING ESTABLISHMENTS: All existing establishments operating before the effective date of this ordinance and have not complied with its provisions shall be afforded a reasonable period of time to comply subject to the approval of the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative.

--- [Page 59] ---
**Page 59 of 77**

**CHAPTER XIII: TOILETIAL AND BATHROOM FACILITIES**

SECTION 1. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all persons or establishments offering services to the public for their physical care or appearance such as barber shops, beauty parlors, hair dressing and manicuring establishments, body fitness and figure slimminging saloons, tattooing and other similar establishments of services.

SECTION 2. SANITARY REQUIREMENTS

2.1 Sanitary Permit. No person shall operate any establishments or services as herein described unless a Sanitary Permit issued by the City Health Officer is secured.

2.2 Sanitary Inspection Clearance. A Sanitary Inspection Clearance issued by the City Health Office upon the recommendation of the Rural Sanitation Inspector and the Rural Health Physician concerned shall be secured before a Sanitary Permit to Operate is issued.

2.3 Health Certificate. No person shall be allowed to work in these establishments unless a Health Certificate issued by the City Health Officer is secured and shall be in accordance with Section 3, Chapter II of this Ordinance.

SECTION 3. GENERAL SANITARY REQUIREMENTS

3.1 Every owner or operator of such establishments shall sanitize or disinfect all equipment, paraphernalia and other similar articles used by sterilization, chemical disinfection and other methods approved by the City Health Offices or his duly authorized representative.

3.2 No employee of such establishments shall use for the service of any customer, equipment, paraphernalia and other similar articles that has not been sterilized or disinfected.

3.3 Every employee of such establishments shall observe proper personal hygiene.

3.4 It shall be provided with safe drinking water, adequate toilets, hand washing and drainage facilities and shall be in accordance with P.D. 856.

3.5 A sufficient number of garbage containers in strategic points of the establishment with fly proof covers shall be provided and shall be in accordance with Chapter XII of this Ordinance.

3.6 Other pertinent provisions of this Ordinance, if applicable, shall be adopted subject to the approval of the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative.

3.7 Vending of any food or articles of food shall not be allowed outside of the designated areas.

SECTION 4. EXISTING ESTABLISHMENTS. All existing establishments operating before the approval of the Ordinance and have not complied with its provisions shall be afforded a reasonable period of time to comply subject to the approval of the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative.

--- [Page 60] ---
**Page 60 of 77**

**CHAPTER XXXII: PUBLIC SWIMMING AND BATHING FACILITIES**

SECTION 1. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all public swimming and bathing places including swimming pools, bathing beaches and bathhouses operated for public use by hotels, resorts, motels, private individuals or persons, clubs or institutions for their patrons including all employees therein.

SECTION 2. SANITARY REQUIREMENTS

2.1 Sanitary Permit. No person shall operate any establishments and facilities as herein described unless a Sanitary Permit issued by the City Health Officer has been secured.

2.2. Sanitary Inspection Clearance. A Sanitary Inspection Clearance issued by the City Health Officer upon the recommendation of the Rural Health Physician and the Rural Sanitation Inspector concerned shall be secured before a Sanitary Permit to Operate is issued.

2.3. Health Certificate. No person shall be allowed to work in these establishments and facilities unless a Health Certificate issued by the City Health Officer has been secured and shall be in accordance with Section III of the Ordinance.

SECTION 3. GENERAL SANITARY REQUIREMENTS

3.1. All public swimming and bathing places both natural and artificial shall be under the sanitary control and supervision of the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative.

3.2. Standard of cleanliness and bacteriological purity of the water shall apply to both indoor and outdoor swimming pools and the same precautions shall be undertaken against the spread of communicable diseases.

3.3. At public bathing beaches or natural waters, the same sanitary standards shall apply to bathing houses, dressing rooms, toilet facilities and to the handling and care of bathing suits, towels and other articles of bathing apparel being offered for rent.

3.4. Sanitary drinking facilities with a supply of safe and potable water shall be installed at all strategic areas of the bathing place.

3.5. Sufficient and adequate toilet, hand washing, garbage and drainage facilities shall be provided and shall be in accordance with Section 4, Chapter XIX of this Ordinance.

3.6. Domesticated fowls and other animals shall not be allowed in any parts of the bathing place.

3.7. Spitting and blowing of nose is strictly prohibited while swimming or bathing in swimming pools.

3.8. No person with evidence of having a highly contagious communicable disease shall be allowed in the pool area, bathing places or bath house.

3.9. No bathing beach shall be opened or maintained on a natural body of water that has been determined or declared by the Department of Enviroment and Natural Resources (D.E.N.R.) and City Health Office to be unsanitary or unhealthful as to be a menace to public health as used for bathing and swimming.

--- [Page 61] ---
3.10. Suitable placards embodying therein places regulations and instructions shall be conspicuously posted in strategic areas of the bathing place and in sanitary facilities area.
3.11. A sufficient number of watch towers, shall be provided preferably for every fifty (50) meters distance of the shore line, to be used by lifeguards to view or watch bathers in case of accidents and drowning incidents. A first aid booth shall be installed in strategic areas of the establishment or facilities.
3.12. Adequate number of lifeguards and attendants who are properly trained and qualified life savers, competent in aid and rescue methods and techniques and in the use of artificial respiration and other resuscitation measures shall be provided.
3.13. Other pertinent sanitary requirements provided in other Chapters of this Ordinance shall be, if applicable, adopted subject to the approval of the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative.
SECTION 4. LAZING ESTABLISHMENTS. Existing establishments operating before the approval of this Ordinance and have not complied with the provisions of this Chapter shall be ordered a reasonable period of time to comply subject to the approval of the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative.

--- [Page 62] ---
**Page 62 of 71**

**SECTION 1. THE PROVISIONS OF THIS CHAPTER SHALL APPLY TO ALL CAMPS AND PICNIC GROUNDS SUCH AS MOONLIGHT RESORTS, GARDEN RECREATIORS, FARM RESORTS, MOUNTAIN PARKS AND OTHER SIMILAR ESTABLISHMENTS OR FACILITIES SUCH AS PAKS, PLAZAS AND ZOO'S OWNED OR OPERATED BY GOVERNMENT OR PRIVATE ENTITIES INCLUDING THEIR EMPLOYEES.**

**SECTION 2. SANITARY REQUIREMENTS**

**2.1 Sanitary Permit:** No person shall be allowed to operate any establishments or facilities as herein described unless a Sanitary Permit issued by the City Health Officer has been secured.

**2.2 Sanitary Inspection Clearance:** A Sanitary Inspection Clearance issued by the City Health Office upon the recommendation of the Rural Health Inspector shall be required. Such establishment concerned shall be secured before a Sanitary Permit to Operate is issued.

**2.3 Health Certificate:** No person shall be allowed to work in these establishments or facilities unless a Health Certificate issued by the City Health Officer has been acquired and shall be in accordance with Section 3, Chapter II of this Ordinance.

**SECTION 3. GENERAL SANITARY REQUIREMENTS**

**3.1 All establishments and facilities herein described shall be under the sanitary control and supervision of the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative.**

**3.2 These establishments shall not be located in flood-prone areas and other identified critical areas.**

**3.3 It shall be located in accordance with the Comprehensive Land Use Plan of Davan City.**

**3.4 It shall be accessible from major roads or highways.**

**3.5 Other pertinent provisions regarding sanitary facilities requirements shall be applicable subject to the approval of the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative.**

**3.6 Food and drinking establishments within the premises of these establishments or facilities shall be in accordance with Chapter XV of this Ordinance.**

**3.7 An annual verification program shall be maintained and shall be in accordance with Section 3, Sub-section 3.4, Chapter XV of this Ordinance.**

**SECTION 4. EXISTING ESTABLISHMENTS AND FACILITIES:** All existing establishments operating before the approval of this Ordinance and have not complied with its provisions shall be afforded a reasonable period of time to comply subject to the approval of the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative.

--- [Page 63] ---
**Page 63 of 77**

**CHAPTER XXV. ESTABLISHING REGULATIONS IN THE WHOLESALE OF FRESH AND OTHER MARINE PRODUCTS**

**SECTION 1.** The provisions of this Chapter shall be applicable to all establishments engaged solely in the wholesale of dried fish, fresh or live fish and other marine products intended locally for export including all employees therein.

**SECTION 2. SANITARY REQUIREMENTS.**

**2.1 Sanitary Permit:** No person shall be allowed to operate any establishments as herein described unless a Sanitary Permit issued by the City Health Officer has been secured.

**2.2 Sanitary Inspection Clearance:** A Sanitary Inspection Clearance issued by the City Health Officer upon the recommendation of the Rural Health Inspector shall be secured before a Sanitary Permit to Operate is issued.

**2.3 Health Certificate:** No person shall be allowed to work in these establishments unless a Health Certificate issued by the City Health Officer has been secured and shall be in accordance with Section 3, Chapter IV of this Ordinance.

**SECTION 3. GENERAL SANITARY REQUIREMENTS.**

**3.1 Adequate chilling and cold storage facilities for dried fish, fresh fish and other marine products shall be provided.**

**3.2 Cold storage facilities shall be provided with thermometers and shall be kept clean free from any foul odor and in good cooling conditioning.**

**3.3 All workers shall observe personal hygiene and proper sanitary practices and be provided with appropriate Personal Protective Equipment (PPE).**

**3.4 Sufficient sanitary toilet, hand washing and drainage facilities shall be provided.**

**3.5 An annual vermin abatement program or contract from a Department of Health accredited pest control operator shall be provided and shall be in accordance with Section 3, Sub-section 3.4, Chapter XV of this Ordinance.**

**3.6 Liquid waste management shall be in accordance with Section 3, Chapter XV of the Ordinance.**

**3.7 Solid waste management shall be in accordance with Section 1, Chapter XII of this Ordinance.**

**3.8 Water supply shall be in accordance with Section 3, Sub-section 3.1, Chapter XVII of this Ordinance.**

**3.9 Other pertinent provisions regarding sanitary facilities requirements provided in any Chapter of the Ordinance shall, if applicable, be adopted subject to the approval of the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative.**

**3.10 Transport of such fish and marine products shall be in accordance with Section 2, Sub-Section 2.3, Chapter XV of the Ordinance.**

--- [Page 64] ---
Page 64 of 77

SECTION 4. EXISTING ESTABLISHMENTS operating before the approval of the Ordinance and have not complied with its provisions shall be afforded a reasonable period of time to comply subject to the approval of the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative.

--- [Page 65] ---
**Page 65 of 77**

**CHAPTER XXXVII: ESTABLISHMENTS ENGAGED IN OFF-LEASH RAILING AND OCCUPATIONS**

**SECTION 1:** The provisions of this Chapter shall be applicable to all establishments and persons engaged in offensive trades and occupations such as soap making, manufacturing of glue, cosmetics and fertilizers, curing and tanning of any kind of hides, dyeing, bleaching, dyeing, or coloring of wool, cotton, silk, or other fibers, preparation of solutions used in disinfecting and cleaning purposes, stock piling or disposition of any animal or fowl manure, processing of asphalt, burning of limestone or shells and other manufacturing processes that have the potential to jeopardize the health, sanitation, and safety of a person or the community.

**SECTION 2:** SANITARY REQUIREMENTS

**2.1:** Sanitary Permit: No person shall be allowed to operate any establishment or undertake any activities herein described unless a Sanitary Permit issued by the City Health Officer or duly authorized representative has been secured.

**2.2:** Sanitary Inspection Clearance: A Sanitary Inspection Clearance issued by the City Health Officer upon the recommendation of Rural Sanitation Inspector and the Rural Health Physician concerned shall be secured before a Sanitary Permit to Operate is issued.

**2.3:** Health Certificate: No person shall be allowed to work in these established places unless a Health Certificate issued by the City Health Officer or duly authorized representative has been issued and shall be in accordance with Section 3, Chapter II of this Ordinance.

**SECTION 3:** GENERAL SANITARY REQUIREMENTS

**3.1:** The operator of such establishments shall provide adequate and appropriate Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) for each employee.

**3.2:** The occupational safety and health of the employees shall be the prime priority of the operators or owners of these establishments and shall provide a first aid box for emergency use.

**3.3:** All effluents and emissions produced by these establishments or facilities shall be within the maximum permissible levels or standards set and formulated by the Department of Health and other government agencies concerned.

**3.4:** Penalties provisions regarding sanitary facilities requirements provided in any Chapter of this ordinance shall be adopted subject to the approval of the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative.

**3.5:** An annual verification program shall be maintained and shall be in accordance with Section 3, Subsection 3.4, Chapter XV of this Ordinance.

**SECTION 4:** EXISTING ESTABLISHMENTS: All existing establishments operating before the approval of this Ordinance and have not complied with its provisions shall be afforded with a reasonable period of time to comply subject to the approval of the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative.

--- [Page 66] ---
**Page 66 of 77**

**CHAPTER XVII. PUBLIC LAUNDRY**

**SECTION 1. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all establishments and facilities engaged in laundering services including all laundering facilities located within the premises of hotels, motels, hospitals, and other business establishments or institutions, including all employees therein.**

**SECTION 2. SANITARY REQUIREMENTS.**

**2.1. Sanitary Permit. No person shall be allowed to operate any establishments or facilities as herein described unless a Sanitary Permit issued by the City Health Officer has been secured.**

**2.2. Sanitary Inspection Clearance. A Sanitary Inspection Clearance issued by the City Health Officer upon the recommendation of Rural Sanitation Inspector and the Rural Health Physician concerned shall be secured before a Sanitary Permit to Operate is issued.**

**2.3. Health Certificate. No person shall be allowed to work in these establishments or facilities unless a health certificate issued by the City Health Officer has been secured and shall be in accordance with Section 3, Chapter IV of this Ordinance.**

**SECTION 3. GENERAL SANITARY REQUIREMENTS.**

**3.1. The sanitary control and supervision of these establishments or facilities shall be under the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative.**

**3.2. All chemicals and disinfectants used shall be of approved type as determined by the City Health Officer.**

**3.3. Availability of adequate supply of potable water at all times.**

**3.4. All equipment and machineries shall be kept clean and disinfected every after use.**

**3.5. Sufficient number of sanitary toilets, hand washing and drainage facilities shall be provided.**

**3.6. Solid waste storage and disposal shall be in accordance with Chapter XII of this Ordinance.**

**3.7. A vermin abatement program shall be maintained and shall be in accordance with Section 3 sub-section 3.4, Chapter XIV of this Ordinance.**

**3.8. An approved type of waste water treatment facilities must be provided.**

**3.9. Other pertinent provisions regarding sanitary facilities requirements provided in any Chapter of this Ordinance shall, if applicable, be adopted.**

**SECTION 4. EXISTING ESTABLISHMENTS. All existing establishments operating before the approval of this Ordinance and have not complied with its provisions shall be afforded with a reasonable period of time to comply subject to the approval of the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative.**

--- [Page 67] ---
**Page 67 of 77**

**CHAPTER XXXVIII: HEALTH CARE, EDUCATIONAL AND PULTRY INSTITUTIONS**

SECTION 1. The provisions of the Chapter shall apply to all health care institutions such as hospitals, home for the aged, medical clinics, lying-in clinics or hospitals, drug rehabilitation centers, mental hospitals, educational institutions such as universities, colleges, technical and technical schools, and other similar learning institutions. Such institutions shall be either government-owned or privately owned.

SECTION 2. SANITARY REQUIREMENTS

2.1. Sanitary Permit. No person shall operate any privately owned institution unless a Sanitary Permit issued by the City Health Officer has been secured except for government-owned or controlled institutions.

2.2. Sanitary Inspection Clearance

2.2.1. A Sanitary Inspection Clearance issued by the City Health Officer upon the recommendation of the Rural Sanitation Inspector and the Rural Health Physician concerned shall be secured before a Sanitary Permit to Operate is issued.

2.2.2. All government-owned or controlled institutions are exempted from paying the Sanitary Inspection Clearance fee but shall be subject to inspection under the same conditions as compliance with the sanitary requirements have been provided before their operation.

2.3. Health Certificate. All food handlers in any food and drinking establishments located within the premises of these institutions including those working in the kitchen or food preparation areas of these institutions shall not be allowed to work unless each has secured a health certificate issued by the City Health Officer and shall be in accordance with Section 1, Chapter II of this Ordinance.

SECTION 3. SANITARY FACILITIES REQUIREMENTS

3.1. Sufficient and potable water supply shall be provided and shall be in accordance with Section 2, Subsection 2.3.1.2, Chapter X of this Ordinance.

3.2. Adequate number of toilet facilities shall be provided and shall be in accordance with Section 2, Subsection 2.3.1.1, (b), Chapter X of this Ordinance.

3.3. Solid waste management shall be in accordance with Chapter XII of this Ordinance.

3.4. Specific requirements for bio-medical waste management in concerned institutions shall be based on the standards and guidelines contained in the Manual on Hospital Waste which is hereby made part of this Chapter.

3.5. An annual abatement program shall be maintained and shall be in accordance with Section 3, Subsection 3.4, Chapter XV of this Ordinance.

3.6. Proper and adequate ventilation, lighting, and drainage facilities shall be provided.

--- [Page 68] ---
Page 68 of 71

3.1 Other pertinent provisions regarding sanitary facilities requirements provided in any Chapter of this Ordinance shall, if applicable, be adopted.

SECTION 4. Except as hereinafter herein provided institutions which have not complied with the sanitary requirements herein provided operating before the approval of this Ordinance shall be afforded a reasonable period of time to comply subject to the approval of the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative.

--- [Page 69] ---
**Page 69 of 77**

**CHAPTER XXXIX. PORTS; FISH FORTS; PORT PASSENGER TERMINALS; AIRPORTS AND AIRPORT PASSENGER TERMINALS**

SECTION 1. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all ports, fish forts, airports, and airport passenger terminals operated either by private persons or government entities including its personnel and other facilities within the premises or perimeter of any establishments and facilities including all employee's therein.

SECTION 2. SANITARY REQUIREMENTS:

2.1. Sanitary Permit: No private person or government entity shall operate any establishments and facilities as herein described without first securing a Sanitary Permit issued by the City Health Officer.

2.2. Sanitary Inspection Clearance: A Sanitary Inspection Clearance issued by the City Health Office upon the recommendation of the Rural Sanitary Inspector and the Rural Health Physician concerned shall be secured before any establishment or facility may be opened for use.

2.3. Health Certificate: No person shall be allowed to work or operate in these establishments or facilities without first securing a Health Certificate issued by the City Health Office and shall be in accordance with Section 3. Chapter XVII of this Ordinance.

SECTION 3. GENERAL SANITARY REQUIREMENTS:

3.1. Cold and chilling storage facilities of fish ports shall be in accordance with Section 3. sub-sections 3.1 and 3.2. Chapter XVII of this Ordinance.

3.2. An annual vermin abatement plan or contract from a Department of Health accredited pest control operator shall be provided.

3.3. Sufficient toilet, hand washing, and drainage facilities shall be provided for departing passengers and dock workers.

3.4. Liquid waste management shall be in accordance with Section 3. sub-section 3.2. Chapter XVII of this Ordinance.

3.5. Solid waste management shall be in accordance with Section 1. Chapter XII of this Ordinance.

3.6. Water supply shall be in accordance with Section 3. sub-section 3.1. Chapter XVII of this Ordinance.

3.7. Transport of fish and other marine products in fish forts shall be in accordance with Section 2. sub-section 2.3. Chapter XVII of this Ordinance.

3.8. Other pertinent provisions regarding sanitary facilities requirements provided in any Chapter of this Ordinance shall, if applicable, be adopted subject to the approval of the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative.

SECTION 4. EXISTING ESTABLISHMENTS AND FACILITIES: All existing establishments and facilities as herein described, operating before the approval of this Chapter and have not complied with the provisions of this Chapter shall be afforded a reasonable period of time to comply, subject to the approval of the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative.

--- [Page 70] ---
**Page 10 of 11**

**CHAPTER XXXI. ESTABLISHMENT OF INDUSTRIES, PROJECTS, PLANTS, FACILITIES AND UNDERTAKINGS WHICH MAY CREATE OR PRODUCE ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH POLLUTION HAZARDS OR IMPACTS**

**SECTION I. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all establishments, industries, projects, plants, facilities, and premises which may create or produce environmental health pollution hazards or impacts or which raw materials used, by products, end-products, or by products' waste products and other processes, activities or undertakings may generate pollution hazards or impacts on workers and the communities exposed such as, but not limited to the following:**

a. Health care institutions and facilities;

b. Establishments engaged in transport industries;

c. Establishments engaged in construction activities;

d. Establishments engaged in the manufacture, storage and/or use of fertilizers and pesticides;

e. Establishments engaged in the manufacture and processing of papers, cellulose, wood and wood products;

f. Establishments engaged in the milling of corn, rice, feeds and flours and other food materials and additives;

g. Establishments engaged in the processing and manufacture of cement/fiber glass/boards;

h. Sawn timber yards;

i. Automotive and car assembling/manufacturing plants;

j. Establishments using biomass as fuels;

k. Establishments engaged in the processing, smelting and manufacture of steel products;

l. Shops and cottage industries;

m. Establishments engaged in the processing, storage and manufacture of firecrackers, explosives, and ammunition;

n. Establishments engaged in the manufacture of electric installations and power generation;

o. Establishments engaged in the manufacture and sale of electric and electronic products;

p. Establishments engaged in the bulk storage, processing and/or sale of gasoline, gas and other petro-chemical products;

q. Establishments engaged in the processing and manufacture of batteries, laboratory chemicals, cosmetics, and pharmaceuticals;

r. Establishments engaged in the manufacturing, cleaning, storing and/or selling activities;

s. Sanitary landfills and other garbage disposal sites;

t. Sludge, gravel and sand extraction, grinding, and filling activities, facilities or balancing plants;

u. Establishments engaged in the drilling or boring of underground water sources;

v. Establishments engaged in the mining of cement and other aggregates and prefabricated products;

w. Establishments engaged in the manufacture and processing of industrial and medical gases;

x. Other projects, activities, operations, and undertakings that would create or produce environmental health hazards and impacts.

**SECTION II. SANITARY REQUIREMENTS**

2.1. Sanitary Permit: No person shall be allowed to operate any establishments, industries, plants, facilities, and premises as herein described unless a Sanitary Permit is issued by the City Health Officer or his duly authorized representative has been secured.

--- [Page 71] ---
2.2 Copies of the following documents shall have also been submitted:

2.2.1 Environmental Compliance Certificate (ECC) issued by the Department of Environment and Natural Resources (DENR) to proponents of projects categorized as Environmentally Critical Projects (ECP) if project is located in Environmentally Critical Area (ECA) as specified in DENR Administrative Order No. 86-37.

2.2.2 Certificate of Non Coverage (CNC) issued by the DENR to proponents of projects not covered under Subsection 2.2.1 above.

2.2.3 Valid Permit to Operate (P.O.) issued by the DENR for the operation of waste water treatment facilities or air pollution control devices.

2.2.4 Initial and Operating Permit issued by the Regional Health Director to owners of projects, establishments, plants, industries, facilities and premises required to secure such documents.

2.2.5 Environmental Health Assessment Report (EHAR) issued by the Director of the Environmental Health Service of the Department of Health (D.H.S.) to owners or proponents of Health Sensitive Projects (HSP) after submission, review and approval of the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) or by the Regional Health Director upon recommendation of the Rural Health Inspector and approval of the Initial Health Examination (IHE) and to owners or proponents of projects that does not fall under HSP or HSP, after submission, review and approval of the Health and Safety Management Plan (HSM).

2.2.6 Sanitary Inspection Clearance (SIC) issued by the City Health Officer upon recommendation of the Rural Sanitation Inspector and Rural Health Physician concerned.

2.2.7 Other required documents provided in existing laws, ordinances, rules and regulations.

2.3 Health Certificate: No person shall be allowed to work in these establishments, industries, plants, facilities and premises unless a health certificate issued by the City Health Officer or the duly authorized representative has been secured and shall be in accordance with Section II Chapter II of this Ordinance.

SECTION 3 SANITARY FACILITIES REQUIREMENTS AND OTHER SPECIFIC PROVISIONS

3.1 Health Care Facilities or Institutions: Health care facilities or institutions shall comply with the pertinent provisions of Chapter XXVIII of this Ordinance and other relevant and applicable laws, rules and regulations.

3.2 Establishments engaged in Construction Activities: Establishments engaged in construction activities shall comply with the specific provisions of Section 2, Sub-section 2.1, Chapter X of this Ordinance and other relevant and applicable laws, rules and regulations.

--- [Page 72] ---
**Page 12 of 77**

**3.5 Establishments Engaged in Transport Industries:**

**3.1.1 Establishments engaged in transport industries shall comply with the pertinent provisions of Chapter XIII of this Ordinance.**

**3.1.2 They shall also comply with the pertinent provisions of P.D. 1181, "Abatement, Control and Prevention of Vehicular Pollution," P.D. 672, and other relevant and applicable laws, rules, and regulations.**

**3.4 Establishments Engaged in the Manufacture, Storage and/or Use of Fertilizers and Pesticides:**

**3.4.1 Establishments engaged in commercial application of pesticides for purposes of urban pest control shall be licensed and shall be in accordance with the specific guidelines, procedures, rules and regulations contained in U.P. Rule 1144, "Creating the Fertilizer and Pesticide Registration System," P.D. 950, "Philippine Environmental Impact Statement System," and R.A. 6666, "The Wastes and Hazardous and Nuclear Substances Control Act."**

**3.4.2 Urban pest control operators or establishments shall conform with the general and safety provisions provided in Section 6, IRR of Chapter XVI "Veteran Control," of the Code on Sanitation of the Philippines or P.D. 856.**

**3.4.3 Employees of the City Health Office and other establishments undertaking spraying and fumigating operations shall only use approved type of pesticides or insecticides and shall be trained in the use, handling and storage of these chemicals.**

**3.4.4 Banana plantations and vegetables or fruit farms shall only use approved type of pesticides, fertilizers, and other agricultural chemicals as authorized by the Pesticide and Fertilizer Authority.**

**3.4.5 These establishments shall comply with Sub-section 3.11.3 of this Chapter and the pertinent provisions of this Ordinance regarding sanitary facilities requirements and other relevant and applicable laws, rules, and regulations.**

**3.5 Establishments Engaged in the Processing and Manufacture of Papers, Cartons, Wood and Wood Products:**

**3.5.1 These establishments shall comply with Sub-Section 3.11.3 of this Chapter and the pertinent provisions of this Ordinance regarding sanitary facilities requirements.**

**3.5.2 Sandalwood and wood shavings from these establishments shall not be stored and disposed of in a manner that will create pollution and shall be in accordance with Chapter XII of this Ordinance.**

**3.5.3 All workers in these establishments shall be provided with sufficient and appropriate type of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) and shall conform with the provisions of the IRR of Chapter VII of P.D. 956 and other relevant and applicable laws, rules, and regulations.**

**3.6 Establishments Engaged in the Milling of Corn, Rice, Feeds, Flour and Other Food Materials and Additives:**

**3.6.1 Hooks and dents and other refuse from these milling establishments shall not be stored and disposed of in a manner that will create pollution and shall be in accordance with Chapter XII of this Ordinance.**

--- [Page 73] ---
3.6.2. The same with Sub-sections 3.5.1 and 3.5.3 of this Chapter.

3.7. Establishments Engaged in the Processing and Manufacture of Cement

3.7.1. Air pollution sources (stationary and mobile) and air emissions from these establishments shall comply with the standards provided in R.C.A. 3/49 otherwise known as the Clean Air Act.

3.7.2. The same with Sub-sections 3.5.1, 3.5.3 and 3.11.3 of this Chapter.

3.8. Sawmills and Lumberyards. The same with Sub-sections 3.5.1, 3.5.2 and 3.5.3 of this Chapter.

3.9. Automotive and Car Assembling Plants or Establishments. The same with Sub-sections 3.5.1, 3.5.3, and 3.11.1, 3.5.2 and 3.16.3 of this Chapter.

3.10. Establishments Using Biomass as Fuel. These establishments shall comply with the provisions of Section 5, Sub-section 5.2, and Section 3, Chapter XV of this Ordinance.

3.11. Establishments Engaged in the Processing, Smelting and Manufacture of Steel and Metal Products

3.11.1. Air emissions, waste water and other discharges from these establishments shall be in accordance with the pertinent provisions of P.D. 1984.

3.11.2. The same with Sub-sections 3.5.1 and 3.5.3 of this Chapter.

3.11.3. The City Health Office shall monitor the occupational health hazards of all workers working in these establishments and the environmental health effects to the communities within the impact zone.

3.12. Shops and Cottage Industries. The same with Sub-sections 3.5.1, 3.5.3, 3.11.1 and 3.11.3 of this Chapter.

3.13. Establishments Engaged in the Processing, Storage and Manufacture of Fire Crackers, Explosives and Ammoniums.

3.13.1. The same with Sub-sections 3.5.1, 3.5.3, 3.11.1, 3.11.3 and 3.16.3 of this Chapter.

3.13.2. Establishments, plants, shops and storage areas of these products shall only be allowed in areas approved by the City Planning Office.

3.14. Establishments Engaged in Electrical Installation and Power Generation.

3.14.1. The same with Sub-sections 3.5.1, 3.5.3, 3.11.1, 3.13.2 and 3.16.3 of this Chapter.

3.14.2. High tension transmission lines shall never pass overhead or underground of residential areas.

3.14.3. Establishments engaged in any electrical installation shall comply with the provisions of the Building Code and other relevant and applicable laws, rules and regulations.

--- [Page 74] ---
Page 74 of 77

3.15. Establishments Engaged in the Manufacture and Sale of Electronic Products:
3.15.1. The same with Sub-sections 3.5.1, 3.5.3, 3.11.1, 3.16.2, and 3.16.3 of this Chapter.
3.15.2. Manufacturer of electric and electronic products shall be required to submit a copy of a clearance issued by the Department of Health (DCH) to the City Health Office before the issuance of a Sanitary Permit and shall comply with P.D. 480.

3.16. Establishments Engaged in the Bulk Storage, Processing, and/or Sale of Gasoline, Gas, and Other Petro-Chemical Products:
3.16.1. The same with Sub-sections 3.5.1, 3.5.3, and 3.11.1 of this Chapter.
3.16.2. Establishments engaged in the bulk storage and processing of gasoline, gas, and other petro-chemical products shall only be located in areas designated by existing zoning laws of Davao including service of gasoline stations.
3.16.3. The owner or operator of such establishments shall institute appropriate health, sanitation, and safety measures to prevent, mitigate, and control the adverse impact to public health and safety.

3.17. Establishments Engaged in the Processing and Manufacture of Batteries, Laboratory Chemicals, Cosmetics, and Pharmaceutical Products: The same with Sub-sections 3.5.1, 3.5.3, 3.11.1, 3.16.2, and 3.16.3 of this Chapter.

3.18. Establishments Engaged in Mining and Quarrying Activities:
3.18.1. The same with Sub-sections 3.5.1, 3.5.3, 3.11.1, 3.16.2, and 3.16.3 of this Chapter.
3.18.2. These establishments shall comply with Ordinance 4069 (Amended Zoning Ordinance 1986).

3.19. Sanitary Landfills and Other Garbage Disposal Areas: These shall comply with the provisions of the IFR of Chapter XVII of P.D. 856.

3.20. Stone, Gravel, and Asphalt Processing and Batching Plants or Facilities: The same with Sub-Sections 3.5.1, 3.5.3, 3.11.1, 3.16.2, and 3.16.3 of this Chapter.

3.21. Establishments Engaged in the Drilling or Boring of Underground Water Sources:
3.21.1. Operators or owners of those establishments shall ensure that the underground and surface water sources are protected and shall comply with the pertinent provisions of the IFR of Chapter II of P.D. 856.

3.21.2. The same with Sub-Sections 3.5.1, 3.5.3, and 3.16.3 of this Chapter.

--- [Page 75] ---
Page 75 of 77

3.2. Other Development Projects such as Industrial Estates, Golf Courses, Fish Ponds Projects and Major Resettlements, Reclamation and Infrastructure Projects. These shall comply with the pertinent provisions of this Subsection and other relevant and applicable laws, rules and regulations.

3.21. Establishments Engaged in the Pre-Mix Process of Cement and Other Aggregates, and Other Concrete or Semi-Concrete Pre-Fabricated Products. The same with Sub-sections 3.5.1, 3.5.3, 3.11.1, and 3.16.2, and 3.16.3 of this Chapter.

3.24. Establishments Engaged in Processing and Manufacture of Industrial and Medical Gases. These shall comply with Sub-sections 3.5.1, 3.5.3, 3.11.3, 3.16.2, 3.16.3 and 3.17.2 of this Chapter.

--- [Page 76] ---
**Page 76 of 77**

**CHAPTER XXII. FINAL PROVISIONS**

**SECTION I. PENAL PROVISIONS**

1.1 Unless otherwise provided in any Chapter or Section of this Ordinance, any establishment or person who shall violate, resist, disobey, refuse, and or neglect to comply with any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be punished with a fine of not less than five hundred pesos (P500.00) or an imprisonment of not less than seven (7) days but not more than one (1) year, or both, at the discretion of the court.

1.2 Any establishment or person who shall interfere with or hinder or oppose or impede any authorized officer, agent or employee of the City Health Officer in the performance of his duties and functions as provided in this Ordinance, or shall fail, down, mutilate, deface or alter any placard or notice affixed to any premises, in the enforcement of the provisions of this Ordinance, shall be punished with a fine of not less than five hundred pesos (P500.00) but not more than five thousand pesos (P5,000.00) or an imprisonment of not less than seven (7) days but not more than one (1) year, or both, at the discretion of the court.

**SECTION II. SEPARABILITY CLAUSE:** In the event that any section, paragraph, sentence, clause or word of the ordinance is declared invalid for any reason, other provisions thereof shall not be affected thereby.

**SECTION III. REPEALING CLAUSE:** All existing city ordinances on health and sanitation thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.

**SECTION IV. EFFECTIVITY:** This ordinance shall take effect upon its publication in a newspaper of general circulation.

--- [Page 77] ---
UNACTED: April 4, 2000 by a majority vote of all the Members of the Sangguniang Panlungsod
CERTIFIED CORRECT:
LOLITA GARCIA
Secretary
ATTESTED:
JOS C. BONGUAN
Vice Mayor II
Presiding Officer
M
APPROVED
18
2000
UEZON C. DE GUZMAN
City Mayor
ATTESTED:
NESTOR M. UECESMA
City Administrator