=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 000778-73 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
Republic of the Philippines
CITY OF DAVAO
Office of the City Council
December 17, 1973
The Honorable City Mayor
City of Davao
S i r :
In pursuance of Paragraph 2, Section 15, of Republic Act No. 4354,
otherwise known as the Revised Charter of the City of Davao, I have the
honor to forward herewith Resolution No. 1097 and Ordinance No. 776,
current series, of the City Council of Davao, for appropriate
action.
Very truly yours,
CC: HONORABLE MAYOR
Assistant Secretary of the Council
on Local and Legislative Matters
Enclos. :
as stated.
1st Indorsement
OFFICE OF THE MAYOR - CITY OF DAVAO
December 19, 1973
Respectfully returned to the Honorable City Council,
City of Davao, approved.
By direction of the Mayor:
RANW-N
HRLIN, JR.
Acting City Secretary

--- [Page 2] ---
5th City Council of Davao
85th Regular Session
Series of 1973
Republic of the Philippines
CITY OF DAVAO
Office of the City Council
ORDINANCE NO. 778
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND REVISING ORDINANCE NO. 4, SERIES OF 1949, OVERRIDE KNOWN AS THE TRAFFIC ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF DAVAO, TO BE REVISED TRAFFIC ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF DAVAO.
Be it Ordered by the City Council, City of Davao, that:
ARTICLE I. TITLE, SCOPE OF ORDINANCE AND GENERAL PROVISIONS.
SECTION 1. - Title of this Ordinance. - This Ordinance shall be known as the "REVISED TRAFFIC ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF DAVAO."
SECTION 2. - Scope of this Ordinance. - The provisions of this ordinance shall control, as far as they apply, the traffic rules and regulations of the City of Davao insofar as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of existing laws.
SECTION 3. - General Provision. - Except as otherwise provided for by existing law, no traffic rules and regulations in the City of Davao shall be implemented or enforced except by virtue of an ordinance duly approved by the City Council. The Police Department shall be charged with the duty of implementing and enforcing the provisions of this ordinance.
ARTICLE II. REVISIONS
Words and phrases defined. - As used in this Ordinance:
a) "Motor Vehicle" shall mean any vehicle propelled by any power other than muscular power using the streets and highways within the City of Davao, but excepting road rollers, twelley cars, street sweepers, sycrklers, lana sweepers, bulldozers, graders, fork-lifts, amphibian trucks and engines if not used on streets and highways, vehicles which run only on rails or tracks, and tractors, tractors and traction engines of all kinds used exclusively for

--- [Page 3] ---
-2-
Ordinance No. 778, series of 1973, continued.
agricultural purposes, (Land Transportation Code)
Trailers having any number of wheels, when propelled or intended to be propelled by attachment to a motor vehicle, shall be classified as separate motor vehicles with no power rating.
(Land Trams, & Traffic Code)
b) "Passenger Automobiles" shall mean all pneumatic-tire vehicles of types similar to those usually known under the following terms: touring car, command car, speedster, sportsman, roadster, jeep cycle car (except motor wheel and similar small articles which are classified as motor-cycles), coupe, landauette, closed car, limousine, cabriolet, and sedan.
Motor vehicles with changed or rebuilt bodies, such as jeepney, jinney, or station wagons, using a chassis of the usual pneumatic-tire passenger automobile type, shall also be classified as passenger automobiles if their net allowable carrying capacity does not exceed nine passengers and if they are not used primarily for carrying freight or merchandise. A motor vehicle registered for more than nine passengers shall be classified as "truck".
c) "Articulated Vehicles" shall mean any motor vehicles with a trailer having no front axle and so attached that part of the trailer rests upon the motor vehicle and a substantial part of the weight of the trailer and of its load is borne by the motor vehicle. Such a trailer shall be called as "semi-trailer".
d) "Driver" shall mean every and any licensed operator of a motor vehicle.
e) "Professional Driver" shall mean every and any driver hired or paid for driving use or operating a motor vehicle, whether for private use or for hire to the public.
Any person driving his own motor vehicle for hire is a professional driver.

--- [Page 4] ---
-3-
Ordinance No. 770, series of 1975, continued.
f) "Owner" shall mean the actual legal owner of a motor vehicle, in whose name such vehicle is duly registered.
g) "Highways" shall mean every public thoroughfare, public street, driveway, avenue, park, alley and callejón, but shall not include roadway upon grounds owned by private persons, colleges, universities, or other similar institutions.
h) "Main streets" are wide continuous streets as distinguished from alleys and narrow traversing streets.
i) "Three Streets" are streets designated as such by law or ordinance where vehicles have the right to proceed past intersections without stopping; provided, that they are duly signed posted as such.
j) "Intersection" includes every part of the public highway which joins another at an angle whether or not it crosses the other.
k) "Streets" includes every public thoroughfare, boulevards, driveways, avenues, parks, parkways, plazas, squares, place roads, alleys and callejones. The term "street" shall not be deemed to include the roadway or driveway upon grounds owned by private persons, colleges, universities or other institutions.
l) "Right of Way Street" are streets designated as such by ordinance where vehicles have the priority of passage over vehicles coming from intersections; provided, that they are duly signposted as such.
m) "Pedestrians" are all persons occupying the streets and sidewalks by walking or standing.
n) "Horns" shall include every device for signaling by sound.
o) "Pedestrian lanes" are places duly marked where pedestrians may cross the streets in safety.
p) "Safety Zones" are zones or places duly marked where

--- [Page 5] ---
**Quotations No. 778, series of 1975, continued:**

pedestrians may cross in safety or places where persons may board or alight in safety from street cars and vehicles.

q) "Parking or Forced" for the purposes of this ordinance, shall mean that a motor vehicle is "parked" or "parking" if it has been brought to a stop on the shoulder or proper edge of a highway, and remains inactive in that place or close thereto for an appreciable period of time. A motor vehicle which properly steps merely to discharge a passenger, or to take in a waiting passenger or to load or unload a small quantity of freight with reasonable dispatch shall not be considered as "parked"; if the motor vehicle again moves away without delay.

ARTICLE XII - SPEED LIMIT AND KEEPING TO THE RIGHT

SECTION 1. - RESTRICTION AS TO SPEED.
a) No person shall operate, run, or drive a motor on any street in this city recklessly or without reasonable caution, considering the traffic, the width of the street, and of any other condition than and there existing, and no person shall drive any motor vehicle on any street of this city at such speed as would endanger the life, limb and property of any person or so as to cause excessive or unreasonable damage to the streets, nor at a speed greater than will permit him to bring the vehicle to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead.

b) Subject to the provision of the preceding paragraph, the rate of speed of any motor vehicle shall not exceed the following:

MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE SPEED
| Flags | Passenger Buses & Motor Trains | Motor Trucks |
|-------|---------------------------------|-------------|
| 1 hour | 30 km. per hour                | 50 km. per hour |

1. On open country roads, with no "blind corners," not closely bordered by habitations

Continued on Page 2

--- [Page 6] ---
Ordinance No. 775, series of 1975, continued

MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE SPEED
| Passenger automobiles | Motor trucks |
| --- | --- |
| Vehicles per hour | Vehicles per hour |
| 2. On "through streets" or boulevards, clear of traffic, with no "blind corners," when no designated lanes. | 40 km. per hour | 50 km. per hour |
| 3. On City and Municipal st., sidewalks, alleys, and streets not designated "through streets." | 30 km. per hour | 30 km. per hour |
| 4. Through curved streets, approach intersections at "blind corners," passing school zones, passing other vehicles in motion, or for similar dangerous circumstances. | 20 km. per hour | 20 km. per hour |

a) Within a perimeter of one kilometer from the center of the commercial zone in the following areas: Busesco, Furlill, Mintal, Tugbek, and Calinam, the maximum rate of speed for passenger automobiles, jeeps, or trucks shall be 15 kilometers per hour.

b) The rates of speed hereinafter prescribed shall not apply to the following:

1. A physician or his driver when the former responds to emergency calls;
2. The driver of a hospital ambulance on the way to and from the place of accident or other emergency;
3. Any driver bringing a wounded or sick person for emergency treatment to a hospital, clinic, or any other similar place;
4. The driver of a vehicle, when he or his passengers are in pursuit of a criminal;
5. A law-enforcement officer who is trying to overtake a violator of traffic laws and regulations.

--- [Page 7] ---
6. The driver officially operating a motor vehicle of any fire department, provided that such shall not be construed to allow unlawful or unnecessary fast driving of drivers of aforementioned.

SECTION 2: - Keeping to the right. - Unless a sufficient course of action is required in the interest of the safety and the security of life, person or property, or because of unreasonable difficulty of operation in compliance herewith, every person operating a motor vehicle or an animal-driven vehicle on any street or highway of this city shall pass to the right when meeting persons or vehicles coming toward him, and to the left when overtaking persons or vehicles going the same direction, and then turning to the left in going from one street or highway to another, every vehicle shall be conducted to the right of the center of the intersection of the street or highway.

ARTICLE IV - OVERTAKING AND PASSING A VEHICLE, AND TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS

SECTION 1. - Overtaking a vehicle. - The driver of any motor vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass at a safe distance to the left thereof, and shall not again drive to the right side of the street or highway until safely clear of such overtakeable vehicle, except that, on a street or highway, within a business or residential zone, having two or more lanes for the movement of traffic in one direction, the driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle on the right. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit a driver overtaking and passing upon the right, another vehicle which is making or about to make a left turn.

SECTION 2. - Driver to give way to overtaking vehicle. - The driver of a vehicle about to be over taken and passed by another Continued on Page 7.

--- [Page 8] ---
-7-
Ordinance No. 778, series of 1973, continued.
vehicles approaching from the rear shall give way to the overtaking vehicles on suitable and audible signal being given by the driver of the overtaking vehicle, and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicles.
EXCEPTION J. Restrictions on overtaking and passing.
a) The driver of a vehicle shall not drive to the left side of the center line of a street or highway in overtaking or passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction, unless such left side is clearly visible, and is free of incoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking or passing to be made in safety.
b) The driver of a vehicle shall not overtake or pass another vehicle proceeding in the same direction, when approaching the crest of a grade; nor upon a curve in the street or highway where the driver's view along the street or highway is obstructed within a distance of five hundred feet ahead, except on a street or highway having two or more lanes for movement of traffic in one direction where the driver of a vehicle may overtake or pass another vehicle.
c) The driver of a vehicle shall not overtake or pass any other vehicle proceeding in the same direction, at any railway grade crossing, nor at any intersection of streets or highways, unless such intersection or crossing is controlled by traffic signal, or unless permitted to do so by a policeman or a peace officer, except on a street or highway having two or more lanes for movement of traffic in one direction where the driver of a vehicle may overtake or pass another vehicle on the right. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit a driver overtaking or passing, upon the right, another vehicle which is making or about to make a left turn.

--- [Page 9] ---
-8-
Ordinance No. 776, series of 1973, continued:
4) The driver of a vehicle shall not overtake or pass, or attempt to pass, any other vehicles, proceeding in the same direction, between any points indicated by the placing of official temporary warning or caution signs indicating that men are working on the street or highway.
e) The driver of a vehicle shall not overtake or pass, or attempt to overtake or pass, any other vehicle proceeding in the same direction in any "no passing or overtaking zone".
SECTION 4. - Turning at intersections.
a) The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the right at an intersection shall approach such intersection in the lane for traffic nearest to the right-hand side of the street or highway, and, in turning, shall keep as close as possible to the right-hand curb or edge of the highway.
b) The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the left shall approach such intersection in the lane for traffic to the right of and nearest to the center line of the street or highway, and in turning, shall pass to the left of the center of the intersection, except that, upon streets or highways lined for traffic, and upon one-way streets or highways, a left turn shall be made from the lane of traffic in the direction in which the vehicle is proceeding, provided, however, that in the following streets of the City making a LEFT TURN is prohibited:
A - Quirino Avenue towards San Pedro Extension;
B - San Pedro Extension towards Quirino Avenue;
C - Mt. Apo St., from Malvar St. towards Quirino Avenue;
D - San Pedro St. to Pantaleon Pelayo, Jr., to San Pedro St.;
E - Pantaleon Pelayo, Jr., to San Pedro St.;
Continued on Page 5.

--- [Page 10] ---
Ordinance No. 778, series of 1973, continued.

F - San Pedro St. to F. Riego St.;
G - F. Riego St. to San Pedro St.;
H - San Pedro St. to C. M. Reato St.;
I - C. M. Reato St. to Bonifacio St.;
J - Bonifacio St. to C. M. Reato St.;
K - C. M. Reato St. to Palma Gil St. towards June Circle;
L - C. M. Reato St. to Palma Gil St. towards Antonico Pichon, Sr., St.;
M - Palma Gil St. to C. M. Reato St.

c) For the purposes of this section, the center of the intersection shall mean the meeting point of the medial lines of the streets or highway intersecting one another, except when it is occupied by a monument, grass plot or any permanent structure, other than a traffic control device.

ARTICLES V - ONE WAY SIGNALS, THRU STREETS AND MAIN STREETS

SECTION 1. - The following are "ONE WAY STREETS":

a) Private Alley (Bankerohan Market) from corner Bago Riego St. towards Antonio Pichon, Sr., St.;
b) Antonio Pichon St. towards Rasey St.;
c) Cayetano Banogoy St. (Crockett Road) towards San Pedro St.

SECTION 2. - The following are thru streets or main streets:

1) C. M. Reato
2) San Pedro
3) Antonio Pichon, Sr.
4) Magaysay Avenue
5) Pilipino Bellevard
6) Quiroga Avenue
7) Dr. V. Flocho Avenue
8) Water Street

SECTION 3. - No passenger buses except school buses shall pass along San Pedro and C. M. Reato Streets. No TPU passenger

--- [Page 11] ---
-16-
Ordinance No. 770, series of 1977, continued.
bus or cargo truck shall pass along St. Ann Avenue from corner Chavies St., to the corner of L. Quarrier St. from 6:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M.
ARTICLE VI - RIGHT OF WAY OF SIGNALS
SECTION 1. - Right of Way.
a) When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right of way to the vehicle on the right, except as otherwise hereinafter provided. The driver of any vehicle traveling at an unlawful speed shall forfeit any right of way which he might otherwise have hereunder.
b) The driver of any vehicle upon a street or highway within a business or residential zone shall yield the right of way to a pedestrian crossing such street or highway with a crosswalk, except at intersections where the movement of traffic is being regulated by a peace officer or by traffic signal. Every pedestrian crossing a street or highway within a business or residential zone, at any point other than a crosswalk, shall yield the right of way to vehicles upon such street or highway.
c) The driver of a vehicle upon a street or highway shall bring to a full stop each vehicle before traversing any "through street"; provided that when it is apparent that no hazard exists, the vehicle may be slowed down to five miles per hour instead of bringing it to a full stop.
SECTION 2. - Exemption to the right of way.
a) The driver of a vehicle entering a street or highway from a private road or drive shall yield the right of way to all vehicles approaching on such street or highway.
b) Police, fire department, ambulance answering first or Continued on Page 11.

--- [Page 12] ---
-11-
Ordinance No. 778, series of 1973, continued.
emergency call, any vehicle carrying government mail or telegram properly marked public utility emergency wagons answering fire calls shall have the right of way in any street of the city. The drivers of these vehicles shall not ring their alarm signals unless they are answering emergency calls. Fire apparatus going to and from the scene of fire have the right of way over all other vehicles.
a) The driver of a vehicle entering a "through street" or a "stop intersection" shall yield the right of way to all vehicles approaching in either direction on such "through street".
b) Passenger vehicles shall have the right of way over freight vehicles, and occupied passenger vehicles shall have the right of way over empty ones. But moving vehicles shall have the right of way over vehicles which ordinarily travel slower than the faster moving vehicles. Vehicles ascending or descending approaches to the bridges shall have the right of way over vehicles traveling on the level. Vehicles on the main streets shall have the right of way over vehicles coming from the side streets.
SECTION 3. - Signals.
a) The driver of any vehicle on any street, before starting, stopping or turning from a direct line, shall first see that such movement can be made in safety, and if any pedestrian may be affected by such movement, shall give a clearly audible signal by sounding the horn, and whenever the operation of any other vehicle approaching or following may be affected by such movement, shall give a signal visible to the driver of such other vehicles of the intention to make such movement.
b) The signal herein required shall be given by means of extending the hand and arm beyond the left side of the vehicle, or by an approved mechanical or electrical signal-device.

--- [Page 13] ---
-12-
Ordinance No. 778, series of 1975, continued:
a) No driver of vehicles in motion desiring to make a U-turn shall be permitted to do so unless they give a signal at ten (10) meters before reaching the point where they desire to turn and shall keep the signal until the moment of turning.
ARTICLE VII - FORM OF PARKING
SECTION 1. There are two forms of parking allowed in the City of Denver, namely:
1. Parallel or along side
2. Oblique parking or parking by oblique angle
SECTION 2. Magical parking or any other form of parking is prohibited.
ARTICLE VIII - PROHIBITION AGAINST IMPROPER SOUNDERING OF AUTOMOBILE HORN AND THE USE OF SIREN OR SIREN
SECTION 1. Prohibition against improper sounding of automobile horns. No person shall sound an automobile horn or other signaling device in private alleys, court or hospital zones, or driveways on which dwelling abounds, while the vehicle is not in motion, and in public streets, plazas or other public places, while the vehicle is not in motion, except in so far as may be answering signals in traffic.
SECTION 2. The use of sirens or sirens. It shall be unlawful for any operator, or any driver to use or cause to be used any device known as sirens (sirens) or exhaust or compression whistle in any street or places within the City limits provided that the provision of this paragraph shall not apply to police or fire department vehicles, ambulances and fire wagons.
ARTICLE IX - POLICE VIDE APPARATUS AND VIDE NTERFACES; VEHICLES COMBINED AMONGS,
SECTION 1. No person shall destroy, mutilate, tamper with, Continued on Page 13.

--- [Page 14] ---
-1-
Ordinance No. 778, series of 1973, continued.
defaces, send any false alarm over, or otherwise injure or wrongfully use any apparatus or any part of any public fire alarm and fire hydrant, nor shall any person obstruct the approach to any such apparatus and fire hydrant or any part thereof, by halting any conveyance or other construction of a boulevard, drive, mall, street, or alley in front of or within three meters to either side of, same, or elsewhere.
SECTION 2. - Vehicles considered abandoned. - All motor vehicles not being used under the care of some responsible person and which are found in any of the following conditions shall be considered abandoned:
a) A motor vehicle parked in such a manner as to block or interfere with the free movement of vehicular or pedestrian traffic;
b) A motor vehicle which for any cause is unable to proceed under its own motive power and is left on a street or public place for more than twelve hours;
c) A motor vehicle left in that portion of a street or other public place where signs of "NO PARKING," "LAUNGING AND VELCARIOING ZONE," "SAFETY ZONE" or "FIRE ZONE" are established and properly marked or signposted;
d) A motor vehicle left in any street or public place obstructing or impeding the passage or right of travel of any vehicle or person on any street, driveway, or public place.
ARTICLE I - ACCESSORIES OF MOTOR VEHICLES
SECTION 1. - Every motor vehicle must be equipped with the following accessories:
a) Tires of motor vehicles. - No motor vehicles with metal tires shall be operated upon any street within the City and solid tires whenever used shall be of sufficient thickness to

--- [Page 15] ---
-14-
Ordinance No. 778, series of 1973, continued.
prevent the metal rims thereof from coming in direct contact
with the road.
) Brakes. - Every motor vehicle with four or more
wheels shall be provided with dual hydraulic brake system so
that in case of hydraulic line failure affecting the braking
efficiency of any of the four wheels at least either the front
or rear retain normal braking capabilities. In the absence of
such dual braking systems every motor vehicle with four or more
wheels shall be provided with safety device of such de-
sign and make so that failure of the hydraulic braking parts of
the system will not affect all wheel but rather render at all
time affecting the braking power of either the two front wheels
or the two rear wheels when brakes are applied. This requirement,
however, does not apply to motor vehicles equipped with pneumatic
braking system.
c) Horns. - Every motor vehicle shall be provided with
a horn or signalling device in good working order provided, how-
ever, that no horn or signalling device emitting an exceptionally
loud, starting, or disagreeable sound shall be installed or used
on any motor vehicle, the blowing of horns in front of schools,
churches, hospitals, courts and the legislative building (the City
Council while in session) shall be prohibited.
d) Headlights. - Every motor vehicle of more than one
meter of projected width while in use on any street within the
city shall bear two headlights, one on each side, with white or
yellowish light visible from the front, which not later than one-
half hour after sunset and until at least one-half hour before
sunrise and whenever weather conditions as require, shall both be
lighted.
Additional lamps and light may be carried, but no red lights
shall be visible forward or ahead of the vehicles. Trains, buses,

--- [Page 16] ---
-15-
Ordinance No. 778, series of 1973, continued.
trailsows, and other similar vehicles must carry, while in use on any street or highway within the city during nighttime colored riding lights on each of the four corners not more than ten centimeters from the top.
All motor vehicles shall be equipped with devices for varying the intensity of light, and the driver must dim the headlights or tilt the beam downward whenever the vehicle is being operated on well-lighted streets within the limits of the city, or whenever such vehicle meets another vehicle on any street or highway;
e) Tail lights. - Every vehicle and trailer shall, during the hours mentioned also bear on each side in the rear as lamp showing a red light visible at least one hundred meters from the rear of the vehicle and a lamp throwing a white light upon the number plate issued for such vehicle.
f) Stop lights. - Every motor vehicle shall be equipped at the rear with at least one lamp which shall throw a sustained bright red light visible under all conditions, even under bright sunlight, when brakes are applied. Each bus, truck, trailer, or similar vehicle shall be equipped as its stop light at or near its rear center with a lamp at least twelve centimeters in diameter with the word "stop" inscribed in the center.
g) Motorcycles and other vehicle lights. - Every motor vehicles of less than one meter of projected width shall be subjected to the preceding provisions of this section, except that one headlight and one tail light shall be required. No signal light shall be necessary.
h) Lights than parked or disabled. - Appropriate parking lights or flares visible one hundred meters away shall be displayed at a corner of the vehicle whenever such vehicle is parked on high-

--- [Page 17] ---
-16-
Ordinance No. 778, series of 1973, continued.
ways or in places that are not well-lighted or is placed in such manner as to endanger traffic.
a) Windshield wiper. - Every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a mechanically or electrically operated device for wiping off raindrops or other moisture from its windshield.
b) Use of red flag. - Whenever the load of any vehicle extends more than one meter beyond the bed or body thereof, there shall be displayed at every projecting end of such load a red flag not less than thirty centimeters both in length and width, except that during the hours fixed under subsection (4), there shall be displayed in lieu of the required red flags, red lights visible at least fifty meters away.
c) Muffler. - Every motor vehicle propelled by an internal combustion engine shall be equipped with a muffler, and whenever said motor vehicle passes through any street in the city, or thinly populated zone, the muffler shall not be cut or disconnected. No motor vehicle shall be operated in such a manner as to cause it to emit or make any unnecessary or disagreeable odor, smoke or noise.
ARTICLE XI - OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES
SECTION 1. - All motor vehicles and other vehicles must be registered. - No motor vehicle shall be used or operated on any street or highway within the city of Denver unless the same is properly registered for the current year.
SECTION 2. - Duty to procure license. - Except as otherwise specifically provided for by existing law, no person shall operate any motor vehicle without first procuring a license to drive a motor vehicle for the current year; nor while such license is delinquent, invalid, suspended or revoked.

--- [Page 18] ---
-7-
Examinations No. 776, series of 1977, continued:

SECTION 3. - Driving or parking on sidewalk. - No person shall drive or park a motor vehicle upon or along any sidewalk, path, or alley not intended for vehicular traffic or parking.

SECTION 4. - Driving while under the influence of liquor or narcotic drug. - No person shall drive a motor vehicle while under the influence of liquor or narcotic drug.

SECTION 5. - Obstruction of traffic. - No person shall drive his motor vehicles in such manner as to obstruct or impede the passage of any vehicle, nor, while discharging or taking on passengers or loading freight, obstruct the free passage of other vehicles on the street or highway.

SECTION 6. - Carrying of passengers and freight on top of vehicles. - No person operating a motor vehicle shall allow any passenger to ride on the cover or top of such vehicle. Baggage or freight may be carried on the top of a truck subject to the conditions contained in the permit issued by the proper authorities.

SECTION 7. - Riding on running boards. - He driver shall permit any person to ride on the running board, step board, or mudguard of his motor vehicle for any purpose except to make no pair of adjustment in the motor or to collect fares.

SECTION 8. - Passenger or freight capacity marked on vehicles. All passenger automobiles for hire shall have the registered passenger capacity plainly and conspicuously marked on both sides thereof, in letters and numerals not less than five centimeters in height. All motor trucks, whether for passengers or freight, private, or for hire shall have the registered passenger gross and net weight capacities plainly and conspicuously marked on both sides thereof in letters and numerals not less than five centimeters in height.

--- [Page 19] ---
-18-
Regulations No. 775, series of 1975, continued:
SECTION 9. - Enclosed registered capacity. - No person operating any vehicle shall allow more passengers or freight or cargo in his vehicle than its registered carrying capacity.
SECTION 10. - No one, in any street or highway, shall drive a vehicle that is so covered or loaded as to prevent the driver thereof from having a sufficient view of the traffic in the front following and at the sides of such vehicle.
SECTION 11. - No one shall lead his vehicle, in such a manner as will render said vehicle unable to proceed on the approaches of the bridge.
SECTION 12. - No one shall so load a vehicle with iron or other material that may strike together without properly deadening it so that it shall cause no unnecessary noise, nor allow any portion of the load to strike or drag upon any street.
SECTION 13. - Owners of vehicles must know the names and addresses of their drivers or operators and must furnish them to any peace officer when demanded in connection with the investigation of crimes or accident.
SECTION 14. - No professional driver or operator shall permit any unlicensed person to drive the meter vehicle, or permit a person sitting beside him or in any other part of the car to interfere with him in the motor vehicle.
SECTION 15. - All meter power shall be stopped in every meter vehicle whenever the same is unattended on any street.
SECTION 16. - No driver or operator of a public vehicle shall smoke while his vehicle is in motion and actually occupied with passengers.
SECTION 17. - Hitching to a vehicle. - No person shall hang Continued on Page 19.

--- [Page 20] ---
**Quotations No. 75, sections of 1973, continued**

**SECTION 18.** The passage of any bicycle made for one person ridden by more than one person in all streets of the City of Havana at all hours of the day or night is prohibited. For the purposes of this ordinance, every bicycle shall be regarded as a vehicle to all rules and regulations relating thereto.

**SECTION 19.** No vehicle carrying explosives shall be permitted to stand or remain on any street more than one-half hour at a time. Such vehicle shall display upon them, at each end of said vehicle, a red flag during day time and a white flag during night time, said flags be not less than fifty centimeters square and bearing the words "danger".

**SECTION 20.** No cart or other vehicle used for carrying perilous or offensive materials, night soil or the contents of any water or earth closets, privy, vault, cesspool, or having in them any other noxious substances shall occupy an unassailable time in loading or unloading or in passing along any street or through any inhabited place or area, nor shall any unassailable number of such carts or vehicles gather before any residence, building, or place of business.

**SECTION 21.** The passage of any kind of vehicle is permitted on any street or public ground in the City of Havana, except when duly authorized by law or ordinance.

**SECTION 22.** No person shall knowingly drop, place or throw Continued on Page 20.

--- [Page 21] ---
-29-
Ordinance No. 775, series of 1973, continued.
or cause to be dropped, placed, scattered, or thrown upon any street, my tents, nails, wire, scraped metals, glass, ordinary, or any other substance of things injurious to the feet of persons or animals or to the tires of wheels of vehicles.
SECTION 73. - He person shall maliciously puncture or cut or otherwise injure the tire, nail the finish or purposely damage, dismount, or take away part of a motor vehicle without the permission and consent of the owner.
SECTION 24. - Unless otherwise provided by a city ordinance, every TPU passenger bus, shall allow down at the corner of every street before entering the intersection, and shall stop regularly marked stopping places for such vehicles, whenever requested, signalled, or solicited by any person standing on such appropriated corner or duly marked place of stop, for the purpose of boarding such TPU passenger bus or when signalled by the conductor to stop to take on or leave off passengers in every such instance such TPU passenger bus shall remain stationary for a sufficient length of time to enable such passengers to board or leave safely Provided, That nothing in this paragraph shall be so construed as to permit a driver of any TPU passenger bus to stop his vehicle beyond the building line at a street intersection.
SECTION 25. - Motor vehicles registered under the classifications of (a) private passenger automobiles; (b) private trucks; and (c) private netanvocles of motor wheel attachments shall not be used "for hire" under any circumstances and shall not solicit or accept passenger or freight for pay.
SECTION 26. - Every TPU passenger bus, for the convenience of passengers shall be distinctly numbered both inside and outside, and shall be provided with signs of large plain letters on the front of a size sufficient to be easily read at a distance of not Continued on Page 47.

--- [Page 22] ---
-21-
Cylinders No. 775, series of 1977, continued.
less than thirty meters, to indicate the streets or routes upon which the same shall run; and in the night every car and TTV passenger bus is hereby required to be furnished and equipped with an illumination sign designated in letters of a size to be plainly read at a distance of not less than thirty meters, the route of the same.
SECTION 27. - No person shall spit or excremente on the floor, sides, or steps of any public vehicles, or place feet upon the seat or back. Notices of this provision shall be conspicuously placed by the owner or operator in each and every TTV Passenger bus.
SECTION 28. - The driver, conductor, and employees of any TTV bus company shall use all reasonable care and diligence to prevent injury to persons and property, and on the appearance of danger to any person, or any property, and said TTV passenger bus shall be stopped. All proper care shall be used by such drivers, conductors and employees to prevent injury to times and damages to wagons, carriage, and other vehicles.
SECTION 29. - He person having the control of any vehicle shall negligently allow it to go against the run a foul of any person, vehicle, or other thing whatsoever nor shall any such person fail to stop his car, or vehicle at any place in a street when directed by a police officer.
SECTION 30. - Conductors shall not permit the placing or transporting on any car or public service passenger bus of a package or bundle which interferes with the reasonably free passage of comfort of any person on a car, in accordance with the Public Service Commission rules and regulations and no person after having been notified by any conductor to remove any objectionable packages or bundle from a car, shall permit in keeping the same thereon.
Continued on Page 22.

--- [Page 23] ---
-22-
Ordinance No. 78, series of 1973, continued.

SECTION 31. - Conductors shall exert every effort not to allow their passengers to leave any car while the same is in motion.

SECTION 32. - Bags and other animals shall not be allowed on the passenger buses. Passengers carrying goods or riding on the passenger buses shall be designated to use the rear seats to avoid inconvenience to the other passengers.

SECTION 33. - Every public vehicles shall transport, without extra charge, reasonable baggage not in excess of twenty-five to assist in loading and unloading such baggage.

SECTION 34. - The driver of any public vehicle which is not occupied shall admit to his vehicle all persons belonging to the same group or party, for which there are seats in his vehicle; Provided, That he shall not be compelled to admit:

a) Any intoxicated person, except by order of the police;

b) Any person whose body or clothing is in such a condition as would render the vehicle unfit for further use;

c) Any person to the driver's seat or box.

SECTION 35. - The drivers of public vehicles shall not admit therein any person known to be affected with a reportable communicable disease.

SECTION 36. - If a passenger of any public vehicle becomes disorderly or abusive, attempts to forcibly occupy the driver's seat, or in any way disturb the peace, the driver may suspend the trip and notify the police.

SECTION 37. - The authorized schedule of rates shall be kept about the vehicles at all times when in use and it shall be unlawful to demand any pay for the use of such vehicle unless such schedule of rates is presented to the persons using such vehicles upon his request.

--- [Page 24] ---
-3-
Ordinance No. 775, series of 1973, continued.
ARTICLE XII - NO PARKING ZONES AND LOADING AND UNLOADING ZONES
SECTION 1. - Parking zones. - No driver shall park a vehicle or permit it to stand, whether attended or unattended, upon any street in any of the following places:
a) Within an intersection
b) On a crosswalk
c) Within six meters of the intersection of each line
d) Within four meters of the driveway entrance to any fire station
e) Within four meters of five hydrant
f) In front of a private driveway
g) On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the curb or edge of the street or highway
h) Main entrances of theaters, cinemas,
teatres, stadiums, banks, schools, churches, and offices and public buildings during the period of performances in theatres, cinemas, telegraphs and studios, during banking hours, during class hours in schools, during services in churches and during office hours.
i) Main entrances of court buildings during session hours, and main entrances of hospitals, properly marked or signposted and main entrances of buildings where the City Council is in session.
j) At any place where official signs have been erected or placed prohibiting parking, in the following places:
1. Corner San Pedro-Quirino Avenues to corner Bata Eago-Quirino Avenues.

--- [Page 25] ---
-24-
Ordinances No. 770, series of 1973, continued.
NO PARKING BOTH SIDES
2. Corner Quirino Ave., San Pedro St., to corner Quirino Ave., Mt. Apo St., NO PARKING - left side going towards Mt. Apo St.
3. Corner A. Mabini - Quirino Ave. to corner J. P. Lekul - Quirino. NO PARKING BOTH SIDES
4. Corner J. P. Lekul - Sta. Ana Ave. NO PARKING BOTH SIDES - 20 meters from corner J. P. Lekul - Sta. Ana Ave.
5. Corner San Pedro - Quirino Ave. to Generalis bridge, NO PARKING BOTH SIDES
6. Corner Quirino Ave., Antonio Pichon, Sr., St., NO PARKING ALONG FROM Antonio Pichon, Sr., St. towards Quirino Ave.
7. 50 meters from corner Quirino Ave., - San Pedro St., NO PARKING BOTH SIDES
8. Rasey St., - NO PARKING BOTH SIDES
9. NO PARKING along Marfori St. left side towards Antonio Pichon, Sr., St.
10. NO PARKING along Bata Bago St. from corner Quirino Ave., - Bata Bago St. up Marfori private alley
11. NO PARKING along San Pedro St., right side going towards C. N. Recto St.
12. NO PARKING left side along C. N. Recto from corner San Pedro St., to corner Rinal St.

--- [Page 26] ---
-29-
Ordinance No. 778, series of 1975, continued.
13. NO PARKING Right side along C. H. Recto St., from corner Rizal St., to corner Dumifacio St.,
14. NO PARKING left side along C. H. Recto St., from corner Dumifacio St., to corner Palma Gil St.,
15. NO PARKING Right side along C. H. Recto St., from corner Balma Gil St., to corner Rizal Ave.
16. NO PARKING Both sides from corner Rizal Ave., to corner Villa-Alvillle St.
17. NO PARKING BOTH SIDES Corner C. H. Recto St., going towards Gaytane Banguy St., up to the end of island along Gayta-
nue Banguy St.
18. NO PARKING BOTH SIDES Corner C. H. Recto St., going towards Magaynay Ave., up to the end of island
19. NO PARKING BOTH SIDES 7:00 A. M. to 7:00 P.M. along Gaytane Banguy Extension (Creeched Road) After 7:00 P. M. LIGHT SIDE PARKING ONLY going towards San Pedro St.
20. NO PARKING BOTH SIDES Corner C. H. Recto St. - Dumifacio St., to corner Balma St. - Dumifacio St.
21. NO PARKING on the right side of Ilustre St., from the corner of San Pedro St., going towards Con. Luna St., to a point immediately after Galaxy Theater

--- [Page 27] ---
-5-
Ordinance No. 7/8, series of 1973, continued.

Provided, however, that the prohibition of NO PARKING as provided for herein shall be only from 6:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M., except those provided for in paragraphs (a) to (i) of this section.
SECTION 2. - LAIDING AND UNLOADING ZONES. - It shall be unlawful for any driver to violate the prohibition of "LAIDING AND UNLOADING ZONES". The "LAIDING AND UNLOADING ZONES" herein designated by the City Council are the following:
1. From corner Balen-San Pedro St., to 1st post of Banos Philippines
2. From 6 meters corner Cayetano Bungoy (Grocres Road) to 1st post of New Cristina.
3. From Davie Light Post No. 30-12 to Anthony Chan Building (International Restaurant Post No. 2)
4) From Davie Light Post No. 30-15 to 2nd post of Luis Pineda Building.
5) From Davie Light Post No. 30-20 to 4th post of Bonnally Building
6) From Davie Light Post No. 30-22 to 6 meters corner Pantaleon Palay, Jr., 30,
San Pedro St.
7) From 6 meters corner Pantaleon Palay, Jr., St., to 7th post of Luis Pineda Building.
8) From 1st post of Revuca Building to 6 meters corner San Pedro-Illustro Sts.
9) Along C. M. Bautista St., the loading and unloading zones are the same areas already designated as No Parking Zones.

--- [Page 28] ---
-27-
Quinquennial No. 178, series of 1975, continued:
ARTICLE XIII - RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF PEDESTRIANS ON PUBLIC PLACES
SECTION 1. - Right of pedestrians. - The roadway of highways and streets are primarily intended for vehicles, but pedestrians have the right to cross them in safety, and drivers of vehicles must exercise all possible care not to injure pedestrians.
SECTION 2. - Rules of pedestrians. - Pedestrians should cross pedestrian lanes which are herein designated in the following places:
1. On all four sides of main city streets intersected by side streets;
2. On all corners of side streets;
3. The pedestrian lanes in front of schools;
4. In front of courts;
5. In front of the Veterans Bank;
6. In front of Malva Kitchensette along O. N. Resto St.;
7. In front of Alaim Banking Corp.;
8. In front of Imperial Hotel;
9. In front of Store Hardware, along Magaynay Avenue;
10. In front of Capitol Restaurant along Magaynay Avenue;
11. In front of Bongay Building along San Pedro St.;
12. In front of International Restaurant along San Pedro St.;
13. Between Jaapin & Sons building and Rosales building (near Biocade Com-
mercial)

--- [Page 29] ---
-28-
Ordinance No. 776, series of 1973, continued:
14. In front of the Doctors Hospital along
Quincy Avenue;
15. In front or in the vicinity of the gates
of all schools, public and private.
ARTICLE XIV - MICHIGANIAN TRAFFIC RULES
SECTION 1. - Traffic Signs. - All traffic signs shall
hereinafter be placed exclusively by the Traffic Division of
the Police Department and on appropriate areas designated by
the provisions of this Ordinance or on such areas which may
later on be designated by the City Council.
All traffic signs shall be uniform in color and shall
carry the ordinance number, "Ordinance No. 776, series of 1973",
for the information of the public.
It shall be prohibited for any person or entity other than
the Traffic Division of the Police Department to place any traffic
sign in the City of Detroit.
SECTION 2. - reckless driving. - No person shall operate a
motor vehicle on any street or highway within the city recklessly
or without reasonable caution considering the width, traffic,
grade crossing, curves, curves, condition of the atmosphere and
weather, or as so as to endanger the property or the safety or rights
of any person or so as to cause excessive or unreasonable damage
to the street or highway.
SECTION 3. - Tampering with vehicle. - No unauthorized
person shall sound the horn, handle the levers or set in motion
or in any way tamper with or damage or deface any motor vehicle.
SECTION 4. - Duty of driver in case of accident. - In the
event that any accident should occur as a result of the operation
of a motor vehicle upon a street or highway, the driver shall stop

--- [Page 30] ---
-39-
Ordinance No. 778, series of 1975, continued.
Immediately, and, if requested by any person present, shall show his driver's license, give his true name and address and also the true name and address of the owner of the motor vehicle.
No driver of a motor vehicle concerned in a vehicular accident shall leave the scene of the accident without aiding the victim, except under any of the following circumstances:
1. If he is in imminent danger of being seriously harmed by any person or persons by reason of the accident;
2. If he reports the accident to the nearest officer of the law; or
3. If he has to summon a physician or nurse to aid the victim.
SECTION I. - Obstruction.
a) No vehicle shall stop in any public street except near the right-hand curb thereof and as not to obstruct a crossing, unless in an emergency or to allow another vehicle or pedestrian to cross its path.
b) No motor vehicle with any engine or tire trouble causing it unable to proceed on its own power, shall obstruct or cause any obstruction or traffic within the City of Dave; and it shall be the duty of the driver or operator of such vehicle to conduct it immediately to the right curb of the street.
c) Repair of any part of any vehicle or engine or tire shall be made on top or on approaches to the bridge.
ARTICLE IV - PENALTIES
SECTION 1. - For violation of this Ordinance, the following penalties shall be imposed:

--- [Page 31] ---
-30-
Ordinance No. 178, series of 1975, continued.
a) For over speeding and violation of Keeping
In the Right in violation of Articles III of this
Ordinance, a fine to twenty pesos not exceeding fifty
pesos;
b) For violation of Sections 1, 2 and 3 of
Article IV, overtaking and passing a vehicles and
turning at intersections, a fine of twenty not exceeding
one hundred pesos;
c) For violation of Section 4, Article IV, pro-
hibiting left turn at certain streets, a fine of ten
pesos;
d) For violation of Article V, One Way Streets
and Two Streets or Main Streets, a fine of ten pesos;
e) For violation of Article VI, Right of Way
signals, a fine of ten pesos;
f) For violation of Article VII, Punishment
of Parking, a fine of ten pesos;
g) For violation of Article VIII, Prohibition
Against Improper Soundings of Horns and the use of Siren
or sirens, a fine of ten pesos;
h) For violation of Article II, Police Fire Appa-
ratus and Fire Hydrants, Vehicles Abandoned, a fine of
ten pesos;
i) For violation of Article I, Accessories of
Motor Vehicles, a fine of ten pesos;
j) For violation of Article XI, Operation of Motor
Vehicles;
1. For operating unregistered motor
vehicles or other vehicles, the provisions
of Republic Act No. 4136, otherwise known

--- [Page 32] ---
-11-
Ordinance No. 778, series of 1973, continued

as the Land Transportation and Traffic Code
shall govern;
2. For failure to sign a driver's
license or to carry the same vehicle driving,
a fine of twenty pesos;
3. For driving a vehicle with a delin-
quent or invalid license, a fine of twenty
pesos;
4. For driving a motor vehicle with
delinquent, suspended or invalid registration,
or without proper license for the current year,
a fine of two hundred pesos;
5. For driving a motor vehicle without
first securing a driver's license, a fine of
two hundred pesos;
6. For driving a motor vehicle while under
the influence of liquor or narcotic drug, a fine
of one hundred pesos or imprisonment of not more
than one month or both at the discretion of the
Court;
b) For violation of Article XII, Operation of Motor
Vehicles except Sections 1 and 2, of said Article XII, a
fine of twenty pesos;
1) For violation of Article XII, He Parking Zones
and Loading and Unloading Zones, a fine of twenty pesos;
1. For violation by pedestrians of
Article XIII, a fine of five pesos for the
first offense and ten pesos for succeeding
offenses;
2. For violation of Miscellaneous
Traffic Rules, Article XIV:
Continued on Page -12-

--- [Page 33] ---
-2-
Ordinance No. 775, series of 1975, continued.
1) For violation of Section 1,
Traffic Signals, a fine of twenty pesos;
2) For violation of Section 2,
Reckless driving a fine of fifty pesos;
3) For violation of Sections 1
and 2, a fine of twenty pesos;
4) For violation of Section 3,
Tampering with vehicle, a fine of twenty
pesos;
5) For failure to report in case
of accident as provided for in Section 4,
a fine of one hundred pesos;
6) For violation of Section 5, of
Article XIV, a fine of ten pesos.
For violations of any other provisions of this Ordinance, a fine of ten pesos.
ARTICLE XVI - FINAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 1. - Any ordinances or ordinances which are contrary to or inconsistent with any provision of this Code are hereby repealed.
SECTION 2. - This Code shall take effect upon approval.
RECEIVED: November 28, 1975.
CORNELIO V. MARIANO
Vice Mayor
Executive Officer
APPROVED:
December 18, 1975
LJIN T. SANCHEZ
Mayor, City of Buena
ATTESTED:
RAMON E. RELEN, JR.
Acting City Secretary