=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 000102-05 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
14th City Council
19th Regular Session
Series of 2005
Republika ng Pilipinas
LUNGSOD NG DARAW
Tanggapan ng Sangguniang Panlungsod
PRESENT:
Councillor
Emmanuel D. Galicia, Sr. - Acting Presiding Officer
Vice Mayor
Luis C. Bongoyan
Councillor
Nilo G. Abella
Councillor
Victoria S. Advincula, Sr.
Councillor
Wilbalds M. Alcantag
Councillor
Daniel L. Aponte, Sr.
Councillor
Corrado C. Baluaran
Councillor
Gerald B. Bangoy
Councillor
Arnoldo Ricardo R. Cabling
Councillor
Donnogo G. Calido
Councillor
April M. Dela O. Dayap
Councillor
Jimmy G. Dureza
Councillor
Peter T. Lavina
Councillor
Rene Elias C. Lopez
Councillor
Diegodado Angelo A. Malipupus, Sr.
Councillor
Annie M. Manding
Councillor
Peg C. Mata
Councillor
Nenita R. Orcullo
Councillor
Susan Isabel C. Reita
Councillor
Angela Librado-Trinidad
Councillor
Jose Louis F. Villafuerte
Councillor
Jesus A. Zozobra, Jr.
ON OFFICIAL BUSINESS:
Councillor
Ma. Belen S. Acosta- Biwalo City
Councillor
Leonelde R. Avila, III - Misamis Occidental
Councillor
Pilar C. Braga- San Jose, California, USA
ABSENT:
Councillor
Damiol C. Dayanghiarang
Councillor
Bonifacio E. Militar- On Domestic Emergency Leave
ORDINANCE NO. 0102-05
Series of 2005
AN ORDINANCE REGULATING THE PURCHASE AND
SALE, TRADE-IN, PAWNING, REPAIR, SERVICING
AND MAINTENANCE OF MOBILE PHONES, FOR
THE OWNED AND RECONDITIONED MOBILE PHONE
UNITS IN DAVAO CITY AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES
Be it enacted by the Sangguniang Panlungsod of Davao City in session assembled that:

--- [Page 2] ---
Page 2 of 6
Ord. No. 0102-05

SECTION 1. TITLE: This Ordinance shall be known and called as "An Ordinance Regulating the Purchase and Sale, Trade-in, Pawn, Repair, Servicing and Maintenance of Brand New, Used, Pre-owned and Reconditioned Mobile Phone Units in Davao City and for Other Purposes".

SECTION 2. SCOPE: This Ordinance shall cover all activities related to the purchase and sale, trade-in, pawn, repair, servicing and maintenance of brand new, used, pre-owned and reconditioned mobile phone units and the transactions which are entered into by, but not limited to, consumers, dealers and retailers of mobile phone units, service and repair centers, including pawn shops and cell phone repair shops of all types within the territorial jurisdiction of Davao City.

SECTION 3. DEFINITION OF TERMS: For purposes of this Ordinance, the following terms are defined, as follows:

3.1 Brand New Mobile Phone: Refers to unused mobile phones directly coming from manufacturers such as Nokia, Samsung, Sanyo, Ericsson, Motorola, Siemens, Alcatel, and others which are distributed or sold by dealers to mobile phone retailers with complete gadgets and accessories contained in sealed boxes with International Mobile Equipment Identity (IMEI) seal shown;

3.2 Dealers: refer to the large multinational companies such as Globe, Smart, Sun Cellular, Touch Mobile and other telecommunication companies that offer specialized and varied services in mobile communications; these also include the importers or suppliers, distributors and dealers and retailers and sellers;

3.3 Illegal or criminal means: obtaining mobile phone units through smuggling, theft or theftery or other notorious means and which are covered under the Anti-Phishing Law;

3.4 Mobile Phone Service Center: a person or entity with the required license and business permit engaged not only in the repair, servicing or maintenance of mobile phone units, parts and accessories but also in the purchase and selling and/or in the reselling and trading-in of mobile phone units;

3.5 Phone Accessories: refers to the gadgets or such similar instruments accompanying mobile phone units which include but not limited to, battery chargers, headphones, computer jack and others;

3.6 Proof of Ownership: the means by which owners of mobile phone units establish their ownership of the unit, usually through documentary evidence;

3.7 Reconditioned Mobile Phones: these are mobile phone units which are imitations of branded ones;

--- [Page 3] ---
Page 3 of 6
Ord No. 0102-05
3.8 Retailers: refer to business establishments in the City with the required license and business permit that sell brand new, used or pre-owned and reconditioned mobile phone units including parts and accessories; usually these are accredited outlets of large dealers of mobile phone;
3.9 Cell Phone Repair Shops: these are business establishments which may include stalls, makeshift tables or residences that cater to the servicing, repair and maintenance of mobile phone units which may or may not have the required licenses and permits for operation.
3.10 Used/Pre-Owned Mobile Phone: a mobile phone purchased and used by an original owner for a period of time, it is commonly labeled as "second hand mobile phone".
3.11 Trade-In: the process of upgrading an individual's mobile phone unit through an exchange of the used unit with a brand new one where the buyer pays only the difference in the price between the used and the new mobile phone, or an exchange of a used unit with another used unit of higher function or a higher model.
SECTION 4. GUIDELINES IN THE PURCHASE AND SALE, TRADE-IN, PAWNING, REPAIR, SERVICING AND MAINTENANCE OF BRAND NEW, USED, PRE-OWNED AND RECONDITIONED MOBILE PHONE UNITS.
4.1 All business establishments catering to the sale of brand new mobile phone units purchased and sold, trade-in of used, pre-owned or reconditioned mobile phone units, and in the repair, servicing and maintenance of all types of mobile phone units are required to secure first, a license from the National Telecommunications Commission (NTC) and second, a business permit from the City's Business Bureau;
4.2 The individual seller/pawness of the used or pre-owned mobile phone is required to show proof of ownership of the mobile phone center or pawn shop by presenting any of the following requirements furnished for verification purposes, to wit:
4.2.1 Two valid identification cards;
4.2.2 The International Mobile Equipment Identity (IMEI) of the mobile phone unit, and any of the following:
a. official receipt of original purchase of the mobile unit, in the event of loss, owner must present certificate of ownership from the mobile phone company;
b. battery charger and other accessories of the mobile phone, including the phone box, accessories may depend on the brand and make of the mobile phone;
4.2.3 The mobile phone center or operator/personnel of the pawn shop may require the seller/pawness to give the security code and/or the serial number of the mobile phone unit as additional proof of ownership;

--- [Page 4] ---
Page 4 of 6
Ord. No. 0102-05

4.3 The owner, operator or employees of mobile phone centers
and/or pawn shops have the right to either buy, accept or reject
the used or pre-owned mobile phone on the following conditions:
4.3.1 Proof of ownership has been satisfactorily or unsatisfactorily
presented;
4.3.2 Phone accessories are complete or incomplete;
4.3.3 Mobile phone is in good or poor functional condition as
certified by the mobile phone center's technician or
accredited technician;
4.4 The owner, operator or employees of the mobile phone centers
and/or pawn shops are required to get the complete name,
address and telephone number of the individual selling or
pawning the used or pre-owned phone;
4.5 All purchased or pawned, used or pre-owned mobile phones
shall be reported by the mobile phone centers and/or pawn
shops to the National Telecommunications Commission (NTC)
and the Davao City Police Central Office. The list shall include the following information: name of owner, original
date of purchase, name of company where the unit was bought,
the serial number or International Mobile Equipment Identity
(IMEI) number, and three (3) days of the reporting date.
4.6 When selling or pawning used mobile phones, mobile phone
centers and/or pawn shops are required to present to
prospective buyers upon their request proof of ownership of
the original owner of the mobile phone unit on sale or being
auctioned;
4.7 These guidelines do not cover specific business transactions
covering the price of the used or pre-owned mobile phone unit,
the period of guarantee and cost of maintenance or repair of
the purchased unit;

SECTION 5. PROHIBITION. The following are the prohibited acts
under this Ordinance:

5.1 It shall be unlawful for any individual or business
establishment, particularly distributors, dealers, suppliers and
retailers of mobile phone units and mobile phone service
centers to engage in the sale of brand new phones, purchase
and sale, repair and maintenance of used, pre-owned and
recalculated mobile phones without first requesting and
obtaining from the NTC Memorandum Circulars 07-08/2004 and
08-08/2004, including an electronic engineer or accredited technician to
service the mobile phone unit; and a business permit from the
Mayor's Office,

--- [Page 5] ---
Page 5 of 6
Ord No. 0102-03

5.2 It shall be unlawful for any individual and business establishments particularly suppliers, dealers and retailers of mobile phones and pawn shops to sell, trade-in, pawn and/or purchase used or pre-owned mobile phone unit (s) obtained or possessed through illegal or criminal means as also mandated under the Anti-Fencing Law.

5.3 It shall be unlawful for any individual, mobile phone centers and other business establishments catering to the servicing, repair and maintenance of mobile phones to buy and re-sell illegally obtained or pre-owned mobile phones to other individuals and/or business establishments.

5.4 It shall be unlawful for any individual, pawn shops and other similar business establishments to accept used, pre-owned or reconditioned mobile phone unit (s) obtained or possessed through illegal or criminal means for pawnning purposes; and to auction the same to the public;

5.5 It shall be unlawful for any individual, dealers, retailers and service centers to sell brand new mobile phone units with defective or non-functional parts, original accessories with imitation, used, fake or substandard ones; and to open, tamper or break the phone box and its accompanying seal;

5.6 It shall be unlawful for any individual, dealer, retailer and owner of mobile phone service center to sell reconditioned mobile phone units passed off as brand new or used, therefore, for the protection and information of the buying public, all phones sold separately from their accessories and service center owners shall be properly and correspondingly labeled as brand new, used (second hand) and reconditioned.

5.7 It shall be unlawful for any individual, dealer, retailer or service center owner of mobile hand phones to tamper, alter or modify the International Mobile Equipment Identity (IMEI) and the serial number of the mobile phone unit, including the opening or unlocking of blocked post-paid SIM packs.

SECTION 6. PENALITY: Any individual, distributor, supplier, retailer, service center and/ or pawn shop owner who is found to have in his/her possession a mobile phone unit obtained, acquired or possessed through illegal or criminal means shall be imposed the penalty of imprisonment of six (6) months to one (1) year or a fine of Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00) with revocation of business permit or both at the discretion of the court.

SECTION 7. SEPARABILITARY CLAUSE: Any court declaration that a provision of this Ordinance is unlawful or unconstitutional shall not affect all other provisions herein not declared as such, but shall continue to be in full force and effect.

SECTION 8. REPEALING CLAUSE: Any provision of other Ordinances, rules and regulations inconsistent herewith, are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

--- [Page 6] ---
Page 6 of 6
Ord No. 0102-05
SECTION 9. EFFECTIVITY CLAUSE. This Ordinance shall take effect immediately after its publication as required by the provisions of R. A. 7160 (Local Government Code of 1991).
ENACTED, May 10, 2005, by a majority vote of all the Members of the Sangguniang Panlungsod.
CERTIFIED CORRECT:
LOLITA C. GARCIA
Secretary to the Sangguniang Panlungsod
(City Government Department Head II)
ATTES TED:
D. GALICIA, SR.
President Pro-Tempeore
Acting Presiding Officer
JUN 2 7 2005
APPROVED
RODRIGO R. DUTERTE
City Mayor
ATTES TED:
WENDEL E. AVISADO
City Administrator