=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 000336-10 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
15th City Council  
2nd Regular Session  
Series of 2010  
Republica ng Pilipinas  
SANGUNIANG PANGUNGSOD  
Lungod ng Dabaw  
PRESENT:  
Vice-Mayor Sara Z. Duterte - Presiding Officer  
Councilor Nico G. Abadara  
Councilor Ma. Eden S. Acosta  
Councilor Victorio S. Adoncula Jr.  
Councilor Dante L. Apostol Sr.  
Councilor Conrado C. Baluran  
Councilor Samuel B. Bangoy  
Councilor Rafael B. Basas  
Councilor Leonard John J. Benguyan  
Councilor Plar C. Braga  
Councilor Arnoff Ricardo B. Cabing  
Councilor Danilo C. Dayanguang  
Councilor Paolo Z. Duterte  
Councilor Edgar R. Ibuayan  
Councilor Peter T. Lavida  
Councilor Jose A. Malhipus Sr.  
Councilor Bonifacio E. Militar  
Councilor Tomas J. Monteverde IV  
Councilor Myrna G. L' Dalado-Ortiz  
Councilor Susan Isabel C. Refa  
Councilor Halilia Y. Sudage  
Councilor Eugenio Manuel Trinidad  
Councilor Jose Louie F. Villafuerte  
ABSENT:  
Councilor Wilberto E. Al-ag - On Domestic Emergency Leave  
Councilor Leonardo R. Avila III - On Vacation Leave  
Councilor Teresita C. Mata-Marafon - On Domestic Emergency Leave  
Councilor Rachel P. Zozobra - On Sick Leave  
ORDINANCE NO. 0336-10  
Series of 2010  
AN ORDINANCE TO INSTITUTIONALIZE A  
BARANGAY BLOOD DONORS' PROGRAM FOR THE  
CITY OF DAVAO  
Be it ordered by the Sangguniang Panlungsod of Davao City in session assembled that:  
SECTION 1. TITLE - This Ordinance shall be known as "AN  
ORDINANCE TO INSTITUTIONALIZE A BARANGAY BLOOD DONORS'  
PROGRAM FOR THE CITY OF DAVAO".  
SECTION 2. DECLARATION OF POLICY - In order to promote  
public health, it is hereby declared the policy of the City to:

--- [Page 2] ---
Page 2 of 8
Ord. No. 0336-10

2.1 Promote and encourage voluntary blood donation by the constituency and to install and heighten public awareness of the principle that blood donation is a humanitarian act and a community responsibility;
2.2 Provide for adequate, safe, affordable and equitable distribution of supply of blood and blood products;
2.3 Mobilize all sectors of the community to participate in mechanisms for voluntary and non-profit collection of blood;
2.4 Disseminate the value, importance and benefits of voluntary blood donation through an education program; and
2.5 Ensure the safety of all activities related to the collection, processing and storage of blood and blood products.

SECTION 3. DEFINITIONS - For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following terms shall mean:

3.1 Blood/blood product refers to human blood, processed or products of which include blood components, its products and derivatives;

3.2 Barangay Blood Donors' Month refers to the celebration of the Blood Donors' Month in the barangay level where voluntary blood letting activity is the main means to collect sufficient quantity and safe supply of blood. The Barangay Blood Donors' Month is in conjunction with the celebration of the Blood Donors' Month pursuant to Presidential Proclamation No. 1021 dated June 9, 1997 declaring the month of July of every year as the Blood Donors' Month. It is also in accordance with the Implementing Rules and Regulations of the National Blood Services Act of 1994 [RA 7719, Section 13, Item No. 2];

3.3 Barangay Blood Donors' Program refers to the organized program which consists of the actual blood letting and education campaign activities in the barangay;

3.4 Blood bank/center refers to a laboratory or institution with the capability to recruit and screen blood donors, collect, process, store, transport and issue blood for transfusion and provide information and/or education on blood transfusion transmissible diseases;

3.5 Barangay Blood Collection Center refers to the Barangay Hall or other locations conducive for blood donation identified by the barangay as venue for blood donor recruitment and blood donation activity;

3.6 Philippine National Red Cross (PNRC) Blood Donor Card refers to a card issued by the Philippine National

--- [Page 3] ---
Page 3 of 8
Ord. No. 0336-10

Red Cross (PNRC) to a qualified barangay blood donor who has donated a specific amount of blood. This will serve as a priority card that should be presented at the PNRC together with a certification from the Barangay Chairman indicating the number of blood units they are allowed to withdraw every time the donor or his/her family withdraws blood in need of time. This card is non-transferable, should not be sold and for exclusive use only by barangay residents or any individual of the barangay who has been cleared from the Philippine National Red Cross (PNRC). Without the PNRC card and barangay certification, blood will not be released by the PNRC. The card serves as an incentive to the blood donor.

3.7 Voluntary Blood Donor refers to an individual residing in the Barangay who donates blood on his or her own volition or initiative without monetary compensation; the voluntary blood donor may also be a walking blood donor.

3.8 Walking Blood Donor refers to a qualified voluntary blood donor who has donated blood in a particular barangay and who is ready to donate additional blood when needed in his/her community.

SECTION 4. PROMOTION OF VOLUNTARY BLOOD DONATION - To ensure adequate supply of human blood donation, voluntary blood donation shall be promoted through the following:

4.1 Institutionalization of a Blood Donors' Program in the Barangay: Blood donation is hereby made a regular but voluntary activity in the barangay to ensure a steady, adequate and safe supply of blood. The blood donation activity shall be the main component of the barangay's annual blood donation month in conjunction with the celebration of the National Blood Donors' Month pursuant to Presidential Proclamation No. 1021 dated June 9, 1997 declaring the month of July of every year as "Blood Donors Month" and the implementing Rules and Regulations of the National Blood Services Act of 1994 [RA 7719, Section 13, Item No. 2].

4.2 Declaration of Barangay Blood Donation Month: A Barangay Blood Donors' Month is hereby declared hereunder to be annually conducted in all barangays of the city every month of July. It shall feature the following programs:

4.2.1 Blood donation activity: This consist of donor recruitment and blood-letting activities primarily conducted during the Barangay Blood Donors' Month. These shall be strategically scheduled throughout the year to ensure a continuous and accessible supply of blood, with the Philippine National Red Cross (PNRC) as the lead agency in

--- [Page 4] ---
Page 4 of 8
Ord. No. 03-36-10

coordination with the Barangay and the Davao City Health Office (DCHO):

4.2.2. Public Education. This is an organized barangay-wide public education campaign by the Philippine National Red Cross (PNRC) and the Philippine Blood Coordinating Council (PBCC), as the lead agencies in coordination with the barangay to raise the awareness of the barangay residents on the value, importance, advantages, and benefits of blood donation;

4.2.3. Creation and establishment of a Barangay Blood Donors' Club. Members of the club shall come from qualified blood donors of the barangay and shall be entitled to receive the PNBC Blood Donor Card.

SECTION 5. GUIDELINES FOR BLOOD DONATION - All barangay residents are encouraged to donate blood.

5.1 Blood Donation Orientation. All barangays must have a Blood Donation Orientation prior to the blood-letting activity to ensure proper public education and awareness on blood donation;

5.2 Donor Selection. The following are the minimum requirements for a barangay resident to qualify for blood donation:

The individual must:
a. Be in good health or be physically fit;
b. Be between 16 to 65 years of age (those ages 16 to 17 must provide written parental consent; first time donors up to 50 years of age will be accepted, regular donors up to 65 years old);
c. Weigh at least 50 kgs. stripped or 52 kgs. with light clothes on;
d. Have hemoglobin level of at least 12.5 g/L;
e. Have normal body temperature (36.5-37°C). Pulse rate at 60-100/min. Blood Pressure between 90-160 mmHg systolic and 60-90 mmHg diastolic;
f. Have had enough sleep and rest the night prior to blood donation;
g. Have eaten light meals prior to blood donation;
h. Not have medical problems and conditions such as diabetes, hypercholesterolemia, heart problems, kidney problems and other as per assessment of medical personnel;
i. Not suffering from any infection at the time and within a month prior to blood donation, be it viral, bacterial or fungal caused;

--- [Page 5] ---
Page 5 of 8
Ord. No. 0336-10

j. Have not undergone invasive procedures such as surgery, ear and body piercing, acupuncture, and others in the past 12 months prior to donation as determined by the medical personnel;
k. Have not taken any 2-week antibiotics recently.
l. Not involved in high risk behaviors such as having multiple sexual partners, drug abuse and addiction, prostitution and the like;
m. Not pregnant nor breastfeeding at the time of donation;
n. Last blood donation is at least three months ago;
o. Other reasons for donor acceptance and referrals not stated are at the discretion of the attending medical personnel.

5.3 Procedures for Blood Donation

a. Registration: At least two members from each family are encouraged to donate blood. All possible donors should accomplish a Donor Information Sheet provided by the PHR City;
b. Physical Examination: This includes hemoglobin determination by specific gravity or copper sulfate method, ABO blood grouping, Rh typing is done at the blood center laboratory along with the serological tests;
c. Physical Examination and Donor Interview: This step done by the medical personnel includes blood pressure examination, medical history, background, and vital signs check;
d. Blood Collection: This is the extraction of about 400-450 cc of blood performed by trained staff and/or personnel;
e. Rest and Refreshment: After blood extraction, the donor is advised to rest and have fluid replenishment and glucose intake;

SECTION 6. ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS

6.1 All blood donations, blood-letting and integral related activities aligned with the Barangay Blood Donors Program shall hereunder be made a regular and sustained program every Sunday in the City.

6.2 All blood-letting activities in the Barangay shall be held in their respective Barangay Hall or other functional, hygienic and appropriate place decided by the Barangay Council and attended and officiated by licensed and qualified medical personnel from the PHR Blood Center. Blood shall be collected from healthy voluntary donors only;

--- [Page 6] ---
Page 6 of 8
Ord No. 0336-10
6.3 The blood-letting activity shall be held annually within the month of July declared in the entire city as Barangay Blood Donors' Month; in cases where the Barangay cannot schedule the blood-letting activity due to a local epidemic, natural calamity, other calamitous events, and extreme conflicting schedules, the Barangay Council shall decide on a convenient time guided with the principle that blood-letting shall be strategically scheduled throughout the year to ensure a continuous and adequate supply.
6.4 All donated blood shall be stored for processing, screening and dispatching to the Philippine National Red Cross Davao City Chapter. The Philippine National Red Cross (PNRC) shall operate on a non-profit basis: however, they may collect service fees not greater than the maximum prescribed by the Department of Health (DOH) which shall be limited to the necessary expenses entailed in collecting and processing of blood;
6.5 Blood bags and reagents used for the screening and testing of donors, collection and processing and storage of blood shall be jointly shouldered by the Barangay and the Philippine National Red Cross;
6.6 All barangays shall be required to keep at all times a list or directory of qualified voluntary blood donors with their specified blood type. Barangay officials require to update the list after every annual blood-letting activity held in conjunction with the Barangay Blood Donors' Month. An accurate and updated copy of the list shall be forwarded to the Philippine National Red Cross Office (Davao Chapter) after every annual blood-letting activity;
6.7 All successful blood donors shall be issued a Blood Donors Card by the Philippine National Red Cross (PNRC). The Blood Donor Card shall be used by a barangay chairman to authorize any family to draw blood from the PNRC in tune of need free of charge. The card should be presented to the PNRC together with a certification from the Barangay Chairman indicating the number of blood unit(s) they are allowed to withdraw;
6.8 When a Barangay resident is unable to donate, he/she is encouraged to recruit a suitable donor whose blood donation shall be credited to the recruiting resident;
6.9 In situations where there may be inadequate blood stored, the walk-in blood donor concept shall be encouraged and all barangays in the City shall be required to keep at all times a list of qualified walk-in blood donors with their specified blood type;

--- [Page 7] ---
Page 7 of 8
Ord. No. 0336-10

SECTION 7. ROLES OF THE BARANGAY AND OTHER AGENCIES IN THE BARANGAY BLOOD DONORS' PROGRAM

7.1 The Barangay shall make the necessary physical arrangements for the blood-letting activity in coordination with the PNRC, Davao City Chapter. Other needs such as equipment and materials shall be prepared in collaboration also with the PNRC. The Barangay Blood Donor Program shall also be collaborated with the PNRC. The Barangay shall be responsible for administrative accountability and other functions defined in this Ordinance.

7.2 The Philippine National Red Cross (PNRC) shall be the lead agency (along with the Barangay) in conducting the blood-letting activity and the education component of the Barangay Blood Donor Program.

7.3 The Philippine Blood Coordinating Council (PECC) may upon the request of the PNRC assist in the conduct of the blood-letting activity.

7.4 The City Health Office (CHO) shall assist the barangay in all its blood-letting activities in coordinate capacity.

SECTION 8. OTHER PROVISIONS

8.1 The City shall set aside funds as seed money for the operation of the Barangay Blood Donors' Program on the first year of implementation. The Funds shall be used to purchase blood bags, reagents and other materials used for blood-letting. On the second and succeeding years, the City of Davao shall authorize the Barangay to set aside one percent (1%) annually to be taken from the twenty percent (20%) Barangay Development Fund to finance the annual blood-letting activity. The Barangay through its officials are also encouraged to pursue and generate financial support for encouraging blood donation. The Barangay is hereby authorized to provide non-monetary incentives as may be determined by the Barangay. However, in the absence of a Barangay policy or any such regulation to provide non-monetary incentives to voluntary blood donors, the Barangay is not obligated to give such incentives. The Barangay, however, should encourage the program to encourage blood donation from qualified donors.

8.2 Voluntary blood donors shall be provided non-monetary incentives as may be determined by the Barangay. However, in the absence of a Barangay policy or any such regulation to provide non-monetary incentives to voluntary blood donors, the Barangay is not obligated to give such incentives. The Barangay, however, should encourage the program to encourage blood donation from qualified donors.

8.3 The Chair of the Barangay Council for the Committee on Health or any such similar committee shall head the blood donation and blood-letting activities in connection with the Barangay Blood Donors' Month celebration with the Chair of the Committee on Education as

--- [Page 8] ---
Page 8 of 8
Ord. No. 0336-10

Co-Chair to spearhead the education component of the celebration.

8.4 The Barangay shall be required to document all activities pertaining to the conduct of all programs integral to the holding of the Barangay Blood Donors' Month;

SECTION 9. SEPARABILITAS CLAUSE - If for any reason, any section or provision of this Ordinance is declared unconstitutional or invalid, other sections or provisions hereof not affected by such declaration shall continue to be in full force and effect;

SECTION 10. EFFECTIVITY - This Ordinance shall take effect after fifteen (15) days following its publication in two (2) local newspapers of general circulation.

ENACTED, January 12, 2010, by a majority vote of all the Members of the Sanggunan present, there being a quorum.

CERTIFIED CORRECT:

ZULEIKA T. LOPEZ
Secretary to the Sanggunan Panlungsod
(City Government Department Head II)

ATTESTED:

SARA Z. DUTERTE
Vice Mayor
Presiding Officer

APPROVED APR 06 2010 2010

RODRIGO K. DUTERTE
City Mayor

ATTESTED:

WENDEL E. AVISADO
Chief Administrator