=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 000084-00 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
12th City Council
24th Regular Session
Series of 2000

Republika ng Pilipinas
SANGUNIANG PANLUNGSOOD
Lungsod ng Dabaw

PRESENT:
Vice Mayor Luis C. Bonguyan, Presiding Officer
Councillor Senforiano B. Alatorde
Councillor Wendel E. Avisado
Councillor Gerald B. Bangoy
Councillor Jose A. Basa
Councillor Salvador V. Caingles
Councillor Isidro S. Calonia, Jr.
Councillor Manuel P. Cataluna
Councillor Jimmy G. Durres
Councillor Benjamin R. Duterte
Councillor Maria J. Galicia, Sr.
Councillor Rene V. Gallo
Councillor Luzviandia C. Ilagan
Councillor Cornelio Ceser G. Isaguirre
Councillor Juan M. Jovellanos
Councillor Nemita R. Orullo
Councillor Myrna G. L. Daldoce-Ortiz
Councillor Jose Maria Romano S. Pilay
Councillor Pedro R. Salvador
Councillor Dioscoro B. Sampanga, Jr.
Councillor Martin T. Suato
Councillor Alfredo T. Ungab

OFFICIAL BUSINESS:
Councillor Allan L. Dolor
Councillor Tomas J. Monteverde, IV

ABSENT:
Councillor Marlene A. Librado - On Sick Leave
Councillor Cornelio C. Reta, III

ORDINANCE NO. 084
Series of 2000

AN ORDINANCE DEFINING THE QUASI-JUDICIAL
POWERS OF THE SANGUNIANG PANLUNGSOOD AND
PRECIPITATING RULES AND PROCEDURES IN THE
PRIMIORITYATION OF CLAIMANTS AGAINST
ELECTIVE BARANGA OFFICIALS

Be it ordained by the Sangguniang Panlungsod of Davao
City in session assembled:

--- [Page 2] ---
Page 2 of 12
Ord. No. 084

SECTION 1. DEFINITION OF TERMS

A.) Quasi-Judicial Power - The incidental power of an officer or body to hear and determine controversies out of court for administrative or legislative duty. This power is the highest judicial power and determines or ascertains facts and decide cases by the application of the rules of law in the enforcement and administration of laws. It is exercised by the Sangguniang Panlalakad through its Committee on Ethics and Good Government (formerly Blue Ribbon Committee).

B.) Abuse of Authority - Excessive use of power or authority without the consent of a public official. Acts committed with the knowledge of the excesses of one's power or authority as conferred on him by law outside of his duties and function.

C.) Culpable Violation of the Constitution - A deliberate or willful, not unintentional, violation of the fundamental law.

D.) Dishonesty - Lack of honesty or integrity or disposition to deceive or defraud, such as for example, forgery, perjury, bribery, etc. (Ibid). Concealment or distortion of truth in a matter of fact relevant to one's office or connected with the performance of his duties.

E.) Disloyalty to the Republic of the Philippines - An act announcing or seeking to remove allegiance from the Republic such as for instance, rebellion or insurrection.

F.) Misconduct in Office - A transgression of some established and definite rule of conduct, more particularly unlawful behavior or gross negligence by the public officer. Misconduct, whether involving dishonesty, oppression, or any form of misdemeanor, must comprehend a wrongful intention and not a mere error of judgment. It must be misconduct that affects the performance of duties of a public officer and not as a private individual.

G.) Neglect of Duty - The omission or refusal, without sufficient excuse, to perform an act or duty, when it was the officer's legal obligation to perform. The disregard of some duty imposed by law.

H.) Moral Turpitude - These are acts considered to be immoral in itself. Most of these acts are those specifically prohibited by law ("acts proscribed in themselves") as contra distinguished from "mala prohibita" (meaning "acts which are considered wrong because they are prohibited by law").

--- [Page 3] ---
Page 3 of 12
Ord. No. 084

I.) Oppression - An act of cruelty, severity, unlawful
exaction, domination, or excessive use of
authority.
J.) Preventive Suspension - Is a disciplinary sanction
imposed by the Mayor upon the recommendation of
the Committee and concurred by the Sanggunian
Panlungsod.
K.) Punitive Suspension - Is a penalty recommended by
the Committee, concurred by the Mayor, and enforced by the Mayor.
L.) Public Official - Is any person who, by direct
provisions of law, popular election or appointment,
is entrusted with the performance of public functions in the government, duties as an employee, agent or subordinate
official, or any rank or class.
M.) Committee - refers to the Committee on Ethics and
Good Government of the Sanggunian Panlungsod.

Section 2. LEGAL BASIS OF QUASI-JUDICIAL POWER

The quasi-judicial power and function of the Sanggunian is anchored on Sec. 61 of the Local Government Code which states that, "A complaint against any elective official of a municipality, city, province, or territory, or any barangay
Panlalawigan whose decision may be appealed to the Office of
the President. The complaint against any barangay official shall be filed before the Sanggunian Panlungsod or
Sanggunian Bayan concerned whose decision shall be final and
executory."

Section 3. NATURE OF PROCEEDINGS

A.) The environment in quasi-judicial bodies is one of
expeditiousness and expertise. Liberally
conceived remedies are generally unrestricted or
not bound by the technical rules of evidence and
procedures which govern trials before a court.
B.) The Revised Administrative Code does not require
that the investigation of the quasi-judicial body
in the exercise of its quasi-judicial power, the judges or officials
appointed to such office, enjoy wide discretion.
Technical rules of procedure are not strictly
enforced and due process of law in the strict
judicial sense is not indispensable. It is
important that the substance due process
requirement of fairness and reasonableness are
observed.

--- [Page 4] ---
This is a placeholder image for a document that contains legal text. The actual content of the document would be transcribed here. Since the image does not provide any specific text to transcribe, I am unable to provide a complete and verbatim transcription of the legal text. If you have a specific document or text file that needs to be transcribed, please upload it, and I will be able to assist you with that.

--- [Page 5] ---
Page 4 of 12
Ord. No. 084

Section 4. CONCEPT OF INVESTIGATION/HEARING
Investigation or hearing is conducted to look into the facts of each alleged violation, and then the law involved is applied to the facts of the case by the investigator or hearing officer.

Section 5. RULES OF PROCEDURE AND EVIDENCE

A.) The general rule is that quasi-judicial bodies are not bound by the strict or technical rules of evidence governing judicial proceedings. They are given macro leeway in hearing and considering a variety of material evidence and the receipt and consideration of incompetent evidence do not constitute a denial of due process.

B.) The amount (quantum) of evidence must be "substantial" meaning such relevant evidence as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate support to a conclusion.

C.) In other words, evidence may be said to be relevant when it relates directly to a fact from which, by the process of logic, an inference may be made as to the existence of the fact in issue.

D.) The quasi-judicial body may admit and give probative value to evidence commonly accepted by reasonable, prudent men in the conduct of their affairs.

D.1 Documentary evidence may be received in the fore of copies or excerpts, if the original is not readily available. Upon request, the party may have an opportunity to compare the copy with the original. If the original is in the official custody of a public officer, a certified copy thereof may be accepted.

D.2 The Committee may take notice of judicially cognizable facts and generally cognizable facts and scientific facts with its specialized knowledge. The parties are notified and afforded an opportunity to contest the facts so noticed.

E.) In any contested case, the Committee shall have the power to require the attendance of witnesses or the production of documents or other pertinent data upon request of any party before or during the hearing upon showing of general prejudice. Under circumstances provided by law, the Committee may, in case of disobedience, investigate the aid of the Regional Trial Court (RTC) within whose jurisdiction the contested case being heard falls.

--- [Page 6] ---
Page 5 of 12
Ord. No. 084

The court may punish contumacy or refusal as contempt. (Sec. 15, Chapter 3, Book VIII, E.O. No. 292)

Section 6. DUE PROCESS IN QUASI-JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS

A.) Procedural due process is that which hears before it condemns, which proceeds upon inquiry and renders judgment only after trial. It contemplates notice and opportunity to be heard before judgment affecting one's person or property is rendered.

B.) In proceedings of quasi-judicial character, the liberty and property of the citizen must be protected against the interference of arbitrary requirements of fair play. The safeguards which the due process clause assures in the exercise of a quasi-judicial power are:

- that the trier of the facts shall be an impartial tribunal legally constituted to determine the rights involved;
- that no judgment should be made except upon due notice and opportunity to be heard;
- that the procedure of the hearing shall be consistent with the essentials of fair play; and
- that it shall be conducted in such a way that there will be opportunity for a court to determine whether applicable rules of law and procedure were observed.

C.) The Supreme Court laid down the cardinal rights which must be respected in trials and investigations of an administrative character. The court in its ruling noted down the following "cardinal principles":

First - The right to a hearing, which includes the right of the party interested or affected to present his own case and submit evidence in support thereof.
Second - The tribunal or committee must consider the evidence presented.
Third - The decision must have something to support itself.
Fourth - The evidence must be substantial.

--- [Page 7] ---
Page 6 of 12
Ord. No. 084

- Fifth - The decision must be rendered on the evidence presented at the hearing, or at least contained in the record and disclosed to the parties affected.
- Sixth - The tribunal or the committee or any of its judges, therefore, must act on its or his own independent consideration of the issues involved in the controversy and not simply accept the views of a subordinate in arriving at a decision.
- Seventh - The tribunal or the committee should, in all controversial questions, render its decision in a manner that the parties can understand the various issues involved and the reasons for the decision rendered.

Section 7. Grounds for Disciplinary Actions

Disciplinary actions against barangay officials as contained in this ordinance constitute the administrative punishment of admonition, reprimand or censure; withholding of privileges, suspension, forfeiture of salary, demotion or removal from office for commission of the following acts:

A.) Disloyalty to the Republic of the Philippines, to wit:
- espionage
- treason
- conspiracy and proposal to commit treason
- inciting to war or giving motives to reprisals correspondence with hostile country
- piracy on the high seas
- qualified piracy

B.) Culpable violation of the Constitution, to wit:
- arbitrary detention or expulsion
- delay in the delivery of detained person
- retaliation
- searching domicile without witnesses
- interruption of religious worship
- offending the religious feelings
- obstruction of justice
- disruption or dissolution of peaceful meetings

C.) Dishonesty, Oppression, Misconduct in Office, Gross Negligence or Dereliction of Duty, to wit:
- bribery
- malversation
- conniving with or consenting to evasion

--- [Page 8] ---
Page 7 of 12
Ord. No. 984

- REMOVAL, CONCEALMENT, OR DESTRUCTION OF
documents
open disobedience
refusal of assistance
usurpation of powers
usurpation of authority
simulation of birth and usurpation of civil
status
fraud

D.) Commission of any offense involving moral turpitude
or an offense punishable by at least prison mayor,
to wit:
rape
military or concubinage
act of lasciviousness
seduction, corruption of minors and
white slavery

E.) Abuse of Authority which may include, but not
limited to insubordination, frequent absences or
laziness, habitual drunkenness, and gambling
punishable by law.

F.) Unauthorized absence for fifteen (15) consecutive
working days, except in the case of local chief
executives, and four (4) consecutive sessions in
case of members of the Sangguniang Panlalawigan,
Sangguniang Bayan and Sangguniang Barangay.

G.) Application for, or acquisition of, foreign
citizenship, or residence or the status of an
immigrant of another country;

H.) Such other grounds as may be provided under R.A.
7160 and other laws. (Sec. 66; R.A. 7160); (Art.
124 IRR of RA 7160)

Section B. FILING OF ADMINISTRATIVE COMPLAINTS AND
PROCEDURAL RULES IN CONDUCTING AN ADMINISTRATIVE
INVESTIGATION

A verified complaint against any erring elective
barangay official shall be prepared as follows:

A.) A complaint against any elective barangay
official in the City shall be filed before the Sangguniang
Panlalawigad thru the Committee on Ethics and Good
Government. (Sec. 61; R.A. 7160)

B.) The complaint should be accompanied by a sworn
affidavit or statement copies of which will be
furnished to the respondent(s).

--- [Page 9] ---
Page 8 of 12
Ord. No. 084

C.) Within seven (7) days after the administrative complaint is filed, the Sanggunian thru the letterhead shall require the respondent to submit his verified answer in the form of a sworn counter-affidavit or statement within fifteen (15) days from receipt thereof, and complete the investigation of the case within ten (10) days after receipt of such answer of the respondent, and once the notice of the hearing is issued by the Committee.
1.) Unreasonable failure of the respondent to file his verified answer within fifteen (15) days from receipt of the complaint shall be considered waiver of his rights to present evidence in his behalf.
2.) Unreasonable failure to commence the investigation within the prescribed period by the person or persons assigned to investigate shall be a ground for disciplinary action.
D.) When the respondent is an executive official of the barangay, the venue shall be the place where the Sanggunian concerned is located.
E.) No investigation shall be held within ninety (90) days immediately prior to any local elections, and no preventive suspension shall be imposed within the same period. If preventive suspension has been imposed within the said period, it shall lapse thirty (30) days immediately preceding local elections, it shall be deemed automatically lifted upon the start of the said period. (Sec. 62, RA 7160 and ART. 126, IRR).
F.) Commencing of the committee hearing or investigation shall start within ten (10) days except of the respondent's reply or counter-affidavit.
G.) Upon a duly written request of the respondent and/or the complainant, the committee may call a mandatory preliminary conference where both parties will be required to attend and any or all of the following objectives will be explored:
1. The probability of settlement of complaint
2. Clarification of facts and other areas related to the case
3. Conference between legal counsels of both parties
4. Defining of limits and parameters of issues in the complaint
5. Setting of hearing dates

--- [Page 10] ---
Page 9 of 12
Ord. No. 064

Section 9. DISCIPLINARY SANCTIONS FOR ERRING BARANGAY OFFICIALS

As enumerated in Section 7 of this ordinance, offenses found to have been committed by any elective barangay official shall be subject to the following disciplinary hearings, to wit:

A.) Immediate removal or dismissal from office for actions of disloyalty to the Republic of the Philippines or any combination of such acts as enumerated in Section 7.A of this ordinance;

B.) Imposition of disciplinary punishment of dismissal from office, suspension or forfeiture of salary, demotion, or any combination thereof, for a period not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days for culpable violation of the Constitution comprising, but not limited to acts enumerated in Section 7.B of this ordinance;

C.) Imposition of administrative punishment of admonition or reprimand, withholding of privileges, suspension or forfeiture of salary, demotion, or any combination of the foregoing, provided that in cases where the total penalty is less than excusability (60) days for acts of dishonour, oppression, misconduct in office, gross negligence or dereliction of duty and any or combination of the acts enumerated under Section 7.C of this ordinance.

D.) Crimes involving moral turpitude and is not linked with the performance of official duties, conviction by final judgment is required as a condition precedent to administrative action.

E.) Crimes involving moral turpitude committed within the purview of official duties shall have the penalty of immediate removal or dismissal from office.

F.) Censure, reprimand, suspension or removal from office for abuse of authority comprising but not limited to acts enumerated in Section 7.F, 7.G and 7.H of this ordinance.

Section 10. RIGHTS OF RESPONDENT(S)

Respondent shall be accorded full opportunity to appear and defend himself in person or by counsel to confront and cross-examine the witness against him, and to require the attendance of witnesses and the production of documentary evidence in his favor through the compulsory process of subpoena. (Sec. 65, RA 7160).

--- [Page 11] ---
Page 10 of 12
Ord. No. 084

Section 11. FORM AND NOTICE OF DECISION

A.) Investigation of the case shall be terminated within ninety (90) days after the start thereof. Within thirty (30) days after the end of the investigation, the complainant concerned shall render a decision based on the recommendation of the Committee on Ethics and Good Government in writing stating the distinct facts and the reasons for such decision. Copies of said decision shall immediately be furnished the respondent and all interested parties.

B.) The Committee shall call a final hearing with the sole purpose of promulgating the decision reached by the Sanggunian Panlungsod.

C.) A motion for reconsideration of the order for decision may be filed by the concerned party at least fifteen (15) days before receipt of the order. The motion for reconsideration which in itself is a form of an appeal does not prevent the decision from becoming final and executory.

D.) Penalty of suspension shall not exceed the unexpired term of office. The penalty of a fine of six thousand pesos for every administrative offense shall not bar the candidacy of the respondent so suspended as long as he meets the qualifications required for the office.

E.) The penalty of removal from office as a result of an administrative investigation shall be considered as a bar to the candidacy of the respondent for any elective position. (Sec. 66, RA 7160)

Section 12. PREVENTIVE AND PUNITIVE SUSPENSION AND REINSTATEMENT

A.) Preventive Suspension is imposed by the Mayor upon the recommendation of the Committee on Ethics and Good Government as concurred by the Sanggunian; while suspension is imposed by a decision given at by the Committee on Ethics and Good Government, concurred by the Sanggunian and enforced by the Mayor.

B.) Requirements in Issuing a Preventive Suspension Order

A Preventive Suspension Order may be issued by the authorized official concerned at any time after the issues are joined subject to the following requisites:

--- [Page 12] ---
Page 11 of 12
Ord. No. 084

When the evidence of guilt is strong, and given the gravity of the offense, there is great probability that the continuance in office of the respondent could influence the witnesses or pose a threat to the safety and integrity of the records and evidence.

Any single preventive suspension of local elective official shall not extend beyond sixty (60) days.

In the event that several administrative cases are filed against an elective official, he cannot be preventively suspended for more than ninety (90) days within six years from the same grounds existing and known at the time of the first suspension.

Upon the expiration of the preventive suspension, suspended elective officials shall be deemed reinstated in office without prejudice to the continuation of the proceedings against him, which shall be terminated within one hundred twenty (120) days from the time he was formally notified of the case against him.

However, if delay in the proceedings of the case is due to respondent's failure to negotiate with the attorney duly appointed, the duration of such delay shall not be counted in computing the time of termination of the case.

Respondent elective official preventively suspended from office shall not receive salary or compensation during the period of suspension, but upon subsequent restoration to office, he shall be entitled to the full salary or compensation including such emoluments accruing during the suspension. (Sec. 64, RA 7160)

C.) Punitive Suspension

The penalty of suspension shall not exceed the unexpired term of the respondent or a period of six (6) months for every administrative offense, nor shall said penalty be a bar to the candidacy of the respondent so suspended as long as he meets the qualifications required for the office.

The penalty of removal from office as a result of an administrative investigation shall be considered a bar to the candidacy of the respondent for any elective position. (Sec. 66, RA 7160)

Section 13. ADMINISTRATIVE APPEAL

A.) Decisions in administrative cases may, within thirty (30) days from receipt thereof, be appealed to the following:

--- [Page 13] ---
Page 12 of 12
Ord. No. 084
- Office of the President, in case of decisions of
the Sangguniang Panlalawigan and the Sangguniang
Panlungsod of highly urbanized cities and
independent component cities/
- Decisions of the Office of the President shall be
final and executory.
B.) An appeal shall not prevent a decision from
becoming final and executory. The Respondent shall
be considered as having been placed under
preventive suspension during the period of an
appeal. In case he is sentenced to the specific penalty
of exonation, he shall be paid his salary and such
other emoluments during the period of the appeal.
Sec. 68, RA 7160)
Section 14. EFFECTIVITY CLAUSE
This Ordinance takes effect upon approval.
ENACTED, July 18, 2000 by a majority vote of all the
Members of the Sangguniang Panlungsod.
CERTIFIED CORRECT:
LOLITA C. GARCIA
Secretary
ATTESTED:
LUIS F. BONHAM
Vice Mayor II
Presiding Officer
/IVI
APPROVED:
2000
BENJAMIN C. DE GUZMAN
City Mayor
ATTESTED:
NESTOR M. I. EDESMA
City Administrator