=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 004121-96_10419-4121-96 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
11th City Council;
27th Regular Session
Series of 1996
Republica ng Pilipinas
LAWSONO NG DAWA
Tanggapan ng Sangguniang Panlungsod
EXCERPT FROM THE MINUTES OF THE REGULAR SESSION OF THE SANGUNIANG PANLUNGSOD, CITY OF DAVAO, HELD ON FRIDAY, JULY 12, 1996.
PRESENT:
Councilor Diosdado A. Mahupus, Acting Presiding Officer
Vice Mayor Benjamin C. de Guzman, Acting City Mayor
Councilor Pilar C. Braga
Councilor Aristeo V. R. Albay
Councilor Leonardo R. Avila, III
Councilor Leoncio B. Balaguer
Councilor Antonio H. Vergara
Councilor Rene V. Galope
Councilor Juan M. Bracho
Councilor Danilo G. Dayangpirang
Councilor Pedro R. Salvador
Councilor Remitio M. Orellano
Councilor Leoncio B. Balaguer, III
Councilor Alfredo H. Vergara
Councilor Tomas J. Montesedeo, IV
Councilor Jose A. Villanueva
Councilor Frances A. Robillo
Councilor Victorio S. Aguirica
Councilor Norma L'Balado-Ortiz
Councilor Leoncio B. Balaguer, III
Councilor Isidro T. Ungab
Councilor Pas C. Mata
Councilor Jose A. Reyes
Councilor Salvador V. Caingles
Councilor Maria Margarita E. Peloton
ABSENT:
Councilor Nazario K. Navarro, Sr. - on leave
Councilor Bonifacio E. Milliter
RESOLUTION NO. 1049
A proposed resolution/ordinance prescribing color code to all motor vehicles used for ferrying children to and from the school, not only buses but also those private vehicles that are used to ferry children to and from the school, was referred to the Committee on Education and appropriate action of the Body by Councilor Leonardo R. Avila, III, Chairman of the Committee on Children's Welfare.
Several amendments were presented during the discussion on the matter which were accepted by the Proponent considering that some are just minor amendments which did not substantially change the intent and purposes of the Resolution. The Ordinance as amended is hereby enacted in entire section of Section IX in connection with the funding of the same considering that there is no necessity for such funding as the same has been covered by other agencies concerned in connection with its implementation.
Continued on Page 2.

--- [Page 2] ---
Page -2-
Resolution No. 10419,
Ordinance No. 4731,
Series of 1996, "Dtd.:
After careful deliberation, motion of Councilor Leonard R.
Article III, duly signed by Councilors Valenciano C. Banzon and Pilar
C. Reyes, and co-sponsored by Councilors Victor S. Advincula and
Pilar R. Reyes, Pilar C. Braga, Antonio H. Vergara, co-sponsored by
Councilors Alfredo N. Vergara, Pilar C. Braga, Shane L. Dolor,
Tomás J. Monteverde, IV and Victoria S. Advincula, it was
RESOLVED, AS IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED, to approve the following
resolutions:
ADOPTING AN ORDINANCE TO PRESCRIBE A COLOR CODE FOR ALL
SCHOOL VEHICLES FOR THE PROTECTION AND SAFETY OF CHILDREN
WHEREAS, there is a necessity and reasonable basis for
requiring school vehicles usually used to transport children
to and from their respective school premises to wear color
code in view of the delicate physical condition of children
and the possibility of traffic accidents;
WHEREAS, there has not been any color code used by
school vehicles in Davao City to identify them from other
vehicles and alarm drivers of that other vehicles to
exercise extra care to avoid injury to the riding children;
WHEREAS, the Philippine Constitution mandates the state
to defend the rights of children to assistance including
proper care and special protection from all forms of neglect,
abuse, exploitation, maltreatment, and other conditions prejudicial to their development;
WHEREAS, the Philippine Constitution further requires the state to recognize the vital role of the youth in nation-building and to promote and protect their physical, moral, intellectual and social well-being;
WHEREAS, in a committee hearing conducted by the Committee on Children Welfare, representatives from the Ateneo de Davao University, the University of the Philippines, the University of the Philippines, and Good Shepherd have all recognized the practicality of coming up with a prescribed color code for school vehicles that are used to transport children;
WHEREAS, it has also been the declared policy of the City Government of Davao to give high priority to the rights of children for survival, protection and proper development;
RESOLVED, FURTHER, To approve an Ordinance entitled:
ORDINANCE NO. 4731
AN ORDINANCE CONSTITUTING AND PRESCRIBING A COLOR CODE FOR SCHOOL
VEHICLES FOR THE PROTECTION AND SAFETY OF THE RIDING CHILDREN.
Be it Ordered by the Sangguniang Panlungsod, City of Davao that:
SEC. 1.- Title - This Ordinance shall be known as the "Color Code for School Vehicles in Davao City."

--- [Page 3] ---
- Page -3-
Resolution No. 10419,
Ordinance No. 472,
Series of 1996, cont'd.,
SEC. 2.- Declaration of Policy - This Ordinance adheres to the declared policy of the City Government of Davao as provided in the Davao City Children's Welfare Code to give high priority to the rights of children for survival, protection and proper development.
In furtherance of such children's rights to survival and protection, this ordinance hereby prescribed a color code for all kinds of motor vehicles that are used to ferry children to and from their respective school premises described as follows:
Black and orange squares alternately painted, contiguous and adjacent to each other for five inches by seven inches, with a minimum width of one foot in all, on every side of each school vehicle at the expense of the operator.
Drivers of other motor vehicles are hereby enjoined to lower their speed and exercise extra care when proceeding behind or coming from the opposite direction of vehicles wearing the herein prescribed children color code.
SEC. 3.- Definition of Terms - For purposes of this ordinance, the following terms, unless the context otherwise indicates, have meanings herein assigned to them:
a) School Vehicle - Includes any kind of roadworthy vehicles which are used exclusively to transport children to and from their respective learning premises whether or not owned or operated by the learning institution concerned with the franchise duly issued by the Land Transportation Franchising and Regulatory Board (LTFRB) to engage with such route or business of transportation.
b) Operator - The owner of the motor vehicle who is registered as such at the Land Transportation Franchising and Regulatory Board.
c) Color Code - Refers to any mark, logo, or sign which identifies a particular class from the rest.
Continued on Page -4-

--- [Page 4] ---
Page 4

Resolution No. 10349,
Ordinance No. 4271,
Series of 1985, cont'd:

d) Children - For purposes of this ordinance, include pre-school children, elementary pupils, and high school students who are below eighteen (18) years of age and regularly ferried by school vehicles to and from their respective school premises.

a) Protection Rights - Are rights of children to be guarded against any form of abuse, exploitation, and discrimination.

f) Survival Rights - Pertain to the duties of parents and government to provide children with adequate standard of living, access to basic health services, and social security.

SEC. 4. Scope and coverage - This Ordinance covers, not only those motor vehicles owned or operated by the school but also those motor vehicles which are owned or operated by private individuals which are used to transport children to and from their respective learning premises with or without the knowledge and permission of the children learning institution concerned.

SEC. 5. Law Enforcement - The Davos City Traffic Police Command in coordination with the City Traffic Management Board shall be responsible for the enforcement of this ordinance.

SEC. 6. Prosecution of Offenders - The Child and Youth Relation Section (CERS) in coordination with the City Prosecutors Office shall take the lead in the prosecution of offenders of this ordinance.

SEC. 7. Penalty - A penalty of imprisonment for not less than one (1) month nor more than one (1) year or a fine of not less than ONE THOUSAND ($1,000.00) PESOS but not more than FIVE THOUSAND ($5,000.00) PESOS; or both at the discretion of the court, shall be imposed upon children learning institution or individual private operator who shall order, authorize or allow transportation of children by motor vehicles without wearing the prescribed color code.

--- [Page 5] ---
Resolution No. 1056
Ordinance No. 974,
Series of 1996, cont'd:
SEC. 8.- Persons Criminally Liable - The school administrator, principal, operator of private vehicles or any other person in case of corporate entity, the President, who made the order, authorization or directly caused the use of any motor vehicles to transport children without the prescribed color code shall be the one liable under this ordinance.
SEC. 9.- Separability Clause - If for any reason, any section or provision of this ordinance is declared null and void, no other section, provision, or part thereof shall be affected and the un-affected parts thereof shall be in full force and effect.
SEC. 10. Effectivity Clause - This ordinance shall take effect immediately following the completion of its publication in two (2) newspapers of general circulation.
ENACTED: July 12, 1996.
A vote of unanimity has been entered into the records.
APPROVED:
DIGNADO A. MAHYUS
City Councilor
Acting Presiding Officer
ATTESIED:
GUILHERMO J. SADAN
Sanggunian Panlungsod
aba/ema
APPROVED:
1996
RORIGO R. DUTESTE
City Mayor II
City of Davao
ANTONIO V. A. ILAMAS
City Administrator