=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 000435-10 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
15th City Council
23rd Regular Session
Series of 2010

Republica ng Pilipinas
LUNGKOD NG DABAW
Tanggapan ng Sangguniang Panlungsod

PRESENT:

Councillor Ma. Balen S. Acosta
Councillor Nilo C. Abefera
Councillor Victorio S. Advincula Sr.
Councillor Wilberto E. Al-ag
Councillor Dante L. Apostol Sr.
Councillor Leonard R. Avila III
Councillor Conrad C. Baliran
Councillor Samuel B. Bangoy
Councillor Antonio B. Bagaynon
Councillor Pilar C. Braga
Councillor Arnoldo Ricardo B. Cabiling
Councillor Danilo C. Dayanghurang
Councillor Paolo Z. Duterte
Councillor Jose A. Duyan
Councillor Peter T. Lina
Councillor Bonifacio E. Militar
Councillor Myrna G. L. Dalado-Ortiz
Councillor Susan Isabel C. Reta
Councillor Angela A. Librada-Trinidad
Councillor Jose Ignatius Villafuerte
Councillor Rachel P. Zezobrado

ON OFFICIAL BUSINESS:

Vice Mayor Sara Z. Duterte

ABSENT:

Councillor Karlo S. Bello
Councillor Diosdado Angelo A. Mahipus Sr.
Councillor Teresita C. Mata-Mamnon
Councillor Tomas J. Monteverde IV
Councillor Habib Y. Sidagur

ORDINANCE NO. 0435-10
Series of 2010

AN ORDINANCE PROVIDING FOR THE REGULATION OF THE CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF CELLULAR TOWERS FOR MOBILE PHONE SERVICES IN THE CITY OF DAVAO

Be it Ordained by the Sangguniang Panlungsod, in session assembled that:

--- [Page 2] ---
Page 2 of 9
Ord. No. 0435-10

SECTION 1. TITLE - This Ordinance shall be known and cited as the "ORDINANCE PROVIDING FOR THE REGULATION OF THE CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF CELLULAR TOWERS FOR MOBILE PHONE SERVICES IN THE CITY OF DAVAO".

SECTION 2. DECLARATION OF POLICY - It is hereby declared the policy of the City Government of Davao to prescribe limits and restrictions on the use of property within the jurisdiction of the City not only to uphold the interest of the City Government but also to ensure the protection of all the residents therein;

SECTION 3. SCOPE OF APPLICATION - This Ordinance shall apply to all telecommunication towers to be installed by telecommunication companies, their general contractors and subcontractors, and to cellular towers for base stations, cellular and other similar wireless communication facilities in the City of Davao. The installation of antennas and other similar facilities are not covered by this Ordinance.

SECTION 4. DEFINITION OF TERMS - The following terms are defined as follows:

A. BASE STATION - shall refer to a part of a cellular network that contains radio, antenna and other appurtenances necessary to provide coverage for subscribers of cellular mobile telephone service, paging service, trunking service wireless local loop service and other wireless communication service;

B. TOWERS - shall refer to a pyramidal-like skeletal structure with a framework of angular steel, bolted or welded together, typically higher than its diameter and height relative to its surroundings, and used to install antennas or signal booster for better radio and sound wave reception and transmission. These are classified as:

(a) Self-Supporting Towers (SST) - referring to a tower that has three or more supporting steel legs capable of supporting itself without the aid of any appurtenances;

(b) Geysel Towers (GT) - referring to towers consisting of a main monopole and supported by steel guy cables;

(c) Landbased Towers (LT) - refers to towers, whether SST or GT, constructed on an open lot;

C. CITY GOVERNMENT OWNED LAND OR PROPERTY - shall refer to all real properties owned by the City Government of Davao, including but not limited to, open spaces in subdivisions within the city which have been turned over to the City Government, whether titled or not, donated lands, and all other public lands and public property lawfully titled to and under the name of the City Government of Davao;

D. AFFECTED PARTIES/IES - refers to any resident(s) who is/are actually living within the radial distance of a proposed tower to be constructed. Any person residing outside of said radial distance is no longer considered affected even if the said resident is living within the same barangay;

--- [Page 3] ---
Page 3 of 9
Ord. No. 0435-10

E. RADIAL DISTANCE - refers to the area equivalent to the height of the proposed tower measured from the base of the said tower.

SECTION 5. DETERMINATION OF LOCATION - The telecommunications company desiring to construct towers in the City of Davao shall initially inquire and coordinate with the City Planning and Development Office to determine the appropriate area for tower construction in accordance with the provisions of the Land Ordinance.

In addition to open spaces owned by the City Government, the City Planning and Development Office shall also include existing structures owned by the City Government in drawing the spaces available for the purpose so as to cover applications for RT and SST.

SECTION 6. PERMITS AND LICENSES - All applications shall be filed only by the concerned telecommunications company or thru its duly accredited contractor.

A. CLEARANCE FROM THE BARANGAY WHERE THE CELLULAR TOWER IS LOCATED AND/OR SHALL BE CONSTRUCTED.

In securing the barangay resolution/clearance, the telecommunications company shall first apply for the said resolution/clearance with the barangay who has territorial jurisdiction over the place where the proposed tower is to be constructed:

A1 Upon receipt of the said application, the concerned barangay, then its barangay chairperson and the Barangay Development Council (BDC), shall within five (5) days, convene the said Council and determine whether there are affected parties with respect to the said application, after which, a resolution shall be issued by the barangay council without specifying whether the resolution would be favorable or not.

A2 The Barangay Council shall then proceed to issue the barangay resolution authorizing the said project, subject to safe distance requirements provided for by law or regulation and subject to the necessary security fees and for public hearings, which shall be held before the public hearing the affected parties voice their opposition, then the affected party shall have the burden to prove their allegations against the proposed project. Their allegations must be clearly substantiated not only in law but also by convincing proof that they will suffer if the construction of the tower will proceed. Failure of the affected parties to substantiate their claims will cause the barangay council to issue the favorable resolution to the telecommunications company.

A3 The City Council, thru the Committee on Energy, Transportation and Communication, upon receipt of the appeal of the telecommunications company shall schedule a committee hearing within fifteen (15) days for the purpose of deliberating on the claims made by the affected party fairly and squarely on the issue, and has not acted with malice and prejudice to either party. If the Committee finds, after the public hearing, that the claims of the affected party are not

--- [Page 4] ---
Page 4 of 9
Ord. No. 0425-10

substantiated with clear and convincing proof, then the Committee will endorse its findings to the City Council which will issue a City Council Resolution/Ordinance authorizing the construction of the proposed tower. Should the City Council finds the opposition of the affected parties valid, it will pass a resolution denying the appeal of the telecommunication company.

A.4 An affected party may contest the action of the City Council in issuing a favorable resolution/ordinance in favor of the telecommunications company, with the proper Courts of Davao City.

A.5 The applicant pursuant to the guidelines promulgated by the Housing and Land Use Regulatory Board (HLURB) must submit a petition conforming of the majority of the affected households/residents to the Barangay Council prior to the issuance of the City Council Resolution/Ordinance signed by the majority of the affected residents will certify that there is no opposition to the construction of the cellular tower.

B. FROM THE OFFICE OF THE CITY PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT OFFICE (CPDO)

The applicant has to comply and submit the following requirements:

B.1 Vicinity Map

B.2 Site Plan;

B.3 Evidence of ownership in the form of Certified True Copy of Original Transfer Certificate of Title. In the absence of the foregoing, Deed of Sale, a contract to Sell or Lease, or written and duly notarized owner's consent to use, or tax declaration with proof of ownership from the City Assessor's Office will do;

B.4 Certified true copy of the National Telecommunication Commission's (NTC) Provisional Authority (PA), or Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity (CPCPN);

B.5 Radiation Evaluation Report from the Bureaus of Health Devices and Technology of the Department of Health;

B.6 Written Consent

Approval of the governing board/body of the duly constituted Homeowner's Association (HOA) if the cellular tower is located within the residential zone with established HOA and including all members whose households are adjoining the proposed site of the base station;

In the absence of an established HOA, consent/affidavit of non-objection from the majority of the actual occupants within a radial distance equivalent to the height of the proposed cellular tower measured from its base;

B.7 Barangay Council Resolution endorsing the cellular tower;

--- [Page 5] ---
Page 5 of 9  
Ord No. 0435-10  

B.8 Bill of Materials and Estimated Cost;  
B.9 Locomotive Clearance Fee Payable to the Housing and Land Use Regulatory Board (HLURB) or to the Local Government Unit with approved Comprehensive Land Use Plan (CLUP);  
B.10 Authorization of persons allowed to follow-up the clearance;  
B.11 Height Clearance from the Civil Aviation Authority of the Philippines;  

C. FROM THE CITY ENGINEER'S OFFICE (CEO)  
C.1 The Office of the Building Official will assess and evaluate the building mechanical and electrical plans in accordance with the National Building Code of the Philippines. A Certificate of Occupancy issued by the CEO pertaining to the Location Clearance must be submitted by the applicant to the Office of the Building Official CEO and/or Affidavit of Undertaking from the applicant;  
C.2 Fire Clearance to construct in accordance with RA 9514;  

SECTION 7. NOTICE TO COMMENCE: Notice to commence shall be issued by the Office of the Building Official to the applicant after the issuance of a building permit;  

SECTION 8. CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY  
A. CITY PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT OFFICE  
A.1 For validation... re-inspects the area and the building  
B. CITY ENGINEER'S OFFICE (Office of the Building Official)  
B.1 The Sangguniang Panlungsod Resolution should be submitted prior to the approval of the Certificate of Occupancy;  
B.2 For assessment and investigation of the tower, then endorse the same to B.3 Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy Permit; B.4 Endorsement letter to Davao Light and Power Company for the issuance of certification for light connections;  
B.5 Submit approved occupancy permit to the City Assessor's Office for all required inspections;  
B.6 Submit approved occupancy permit to the City Treasurer's Office;  
B.7 All-risk insurance should be copy furnished the Bureau of Fire Protection;  

SECTION 9. SANGGUNIANG PANLUNGASOD - The telecommunication company shall apply for an authority to construct its tower with the City Council as provided in this Ordinance. The applicant shall submit all the permits, clearances, Certificates and Study/Reports issued by the aforementioned agencies in Section 6 above, together with a copy of its Certificate of Public Convenience and Necessity (CFCN) or Certificate of Public Convenience (CP), as the case may be, to the City Council;

--- [Page 6] ---
Page 6 of 9
Ord No. 0435-10

The City Council shall review and thereafter act upon by passing a resolution if it finds
the installation favorable and in order.

In the event the applicant has chosen to construct its tower on a City Government-owned property, the City shall guarantee that all the permits inclusive of the Barangay Resolution/Clearance for the said construction shall be issued;

SECTION 16. PREFERENTIAL RIGHTS OF LOCAL CONTRACTORS - The telecommunication company intending to construct the subject facility on a City Government-owned property owned by the City Government, shall give preferential rights to local contractors or local construction firms qualified to perform the construction as provided, however, that in the absence of such local contractors or local construction firms qualified to perform the service, the telecommunication company may choose from among the accredited contractors of the City Government;

SECTION 11. CONTRACT OF LEASE - The Telecommunication Company who desires to locate in any City Government Property shall enter into a Contract of Lease with the City Government, subject to existing laws, rules and regulations;

SECTION 12. PUBLIC LIABILITY INSURANCE AND HOLD-HARMLESS AGREEMENT - The applicant shall provide the City with proof of an "all risk insurance", which protects against losses due to personal injury, death or property damage resulting from the construction, operation, or collapse of the tower. The insurance shall answer for or cover any and all damages that may be caused, in case of collapse of the tower due to natural deterioration, or that which may be caused by fortuitous events like, strong winds, typhoons and other disastrous calamities;

SECTION 13. OTHER CONDITIONS/PROHIBITIONS:

A. Cellular towers shall NOT be approved near structures of historic or cultural importance and areas designated for scenic corridors. The views of, and vistas from such structures and corridors shall not be impaired or diminished by the placement of a cellular tower;

B. The minimum setback from any property line, public and private road and right of way, building, or structure except for accessory buildings or equipment structures for a cellular tower shall be no less than five (5) meters;

C. No commercial message nor any other signs beyond safety warnings and an identification sign shall be placed on or added to any tower facility;

D. No lights, reflectors, flashes, daytime strobes, or steady nighttime light or other illuminating devices except beacon lights maybe affixed or attached to it in any way to any tower, and as may be required by the Civil Aviation Authority of the Philippines (CAA). However, perimeter lights and other illuminating devices needed for the security and safety of the site may be affixed on the other parts of the facility;

--- [Page 7] ---
Page 7 of 9
Ord No. 0435-10

E. The cellular tower shall be painted international red & white for air navigation visibility in accordance with international standards in air safety;
F. All towers shall be designed to withstand applicable wind load requirements as prescribed under the National Building Code and constructed of or treated with corrosion-resistant material. A regular maintenance schedule shall be followed;
G. All new or existing cellular towers shall comply with all relevant National Telecommunication Commission (NTC) and Civil Aviation Authority of the Philippines (CAAAP) standards and shall not interfere with public safety and other City and Private telecommunication operators;
H. The contractor should apply for temporary electrical connection or provide a generator set for construction purposes to avoid illegal tapping.

I. In case of cellular tower construction subject for removal, the same shall be referred to the City Building Official for the said office to determine the strength condition or structural visibility and condition of the said tower/antenna;

J. No tower antenna shall be constructed on top of any existing building without the approval of the City Building Official;

SECTION 14. TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP - Transfer of ownership of the facility shall be allowed, provided that the assignee shall comply with the provisions of this Ordinance by signing a sworn statement to that effect.

SECTION 15. INSPECTION - The City may unilaterally, at any time, inspect any cellular tower to ensure its structural integrity. If upon inspection, the City's duly designated inspector determines that the facility fails to comply with applicable laws and/or those failure poses a danger to life, property or property, upon receipt of notice thereof, the owner/operator shall have thirty (30) days to make corrections and adjustments on the facility to make it legally compliant and safe. Failure or refusal of the operator/owner to do such adjustments, within the said period shall constitute cause for the removal or dismantling of the facility at the said operator's expense.

The City in such cases shall notify the concerned telecommunication entity with a written notice at least three (3) days before actual date of the inspection for coordination purposes;

SECTION 16. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE - A committee is hereby created composed of the Heads of the following offices or their representatives to conduct the necessary investigation and monitoring of all cellular towers located in the City:

1. City Mayor, as Chairman;
2. Chairman of the Committee on Energy, Transportation and Communication, as Co-Chairman;
3. Chairman of the Committee on Information, Communication Technology;
4. Head of the City Planning and Development Office;
5. Head of the Office of the Building Official;
6. Head of the Business Permits and Licenses Office (BPLO);

--- [Page 8] ---
Page 8 of 9
Ord. No. 0435-10

7. City Assessor;
8. LIGA President;
9. City Health Officer;

SECTION 17. REGULATORY FEE. - Telecommunication companies whose application for the construction and maintenance of cellular towers within the jurisdiction of the City of Davao have been approved shall be required to pay a regulatory fee in the amount of One Hundred Thousand Pesos (P) (100,000.00);

SECTION 18. PENALTIES AND FINES. - Any person, firm, company, or corporation who violates any provision of this Ordinance or fails to comply with the requirements thereof shall likewise be liable to pay a fine of not more than Five Thousand Pesos (P) (5,000.00). Any cellular tower erected, structurally altered, determined to be unseverable, or demolished or carried on in violation of the provisions of this Ordinance shall hereby be declared a public nuisance of consequence per se, entitling the City to apply to the City Trial Court to refrain or abate such nuisance.

SECTION 19. APPEAL PROCEDURES. - Any person affected by any decision, action, denial, or determination made by the interpretation or implementation of the provisions of this Ordinance may file an appeal with the City Council within fifteen (15) days from receipt of notice thereof;

SECTION 20. SEPARABILITY CLAUSE. - If any provision of this Ordinance is found invalid or unconstitutional, its invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the remaining or other provisions of this Ordinance;

SECTION 21. REPEALING CLAUSE. - All Ordinances, executive orders, proclamations and administrative regulations, or part or parts thereof, which are inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed or modified accordingly;

SECTION 22. EFFECTIVITY. - This Ordinance shall take effect upon its passage and publication as provided by law,

ENACTED, June 15, 2010, by a majority vote of all the Members of the Sangguniang Panlungsod.

MARGARITO C. DELA CRUZ
Acting Secretary to the Sangguniang Panlungsod
(City Government Assistant Department Head II)
CERTIFIED CORRECT:

--- [Page 9] ---
Page 9 of 9
Ord. No. 0435-10

ATTESTED BY:

MA. BELEN S. ACOSTA
President Pro Tempore
Temporary Presiding Officer
/MI

APPROVED: 2010

SARA Z. DUTERTE
City Mayor

ATTESTED BY:

ZULEIKA T. LOPEZ
Adzing City Administrator