=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 0290-23 DCHO ===

--- [Page 1] ---
Republic of the Philippines
City of Davao
Office of the Sangguniang Panlungsod

20th City Council
34th Regular Session
Series of 2023

PRESENT:
Vice Mayor J. Melchor B. Quitain Jr.
Councillor Marissa S. Abella
Councillor Nilo M. Abeliera Jr.
Councillor Gilberto E. Balag
Councillor Wilburt P. Alarag
Councillor Al Ryan S. Alejandre
Councillor Dante L. Apostol Sr.
Councillor Conrado C. Baluran
Councillor Jessica M. Bonguyan
Councillor Plar C. Braga
Councillor Augusto Javier G. Campos III
Councillor Jose R. Dayap
Councillor Edgar F. Ibayan Jr.
Councillor Edgar R. Ibayan Sr.
Councillor Richlyn N. Justol-Baguilod
Councillor Diosdado Angelo Junior R. Mahipus
Councillor Rodolfo M. Mande
Councillor Jaffar U. Marohomsalic
Councillor Bonz Andre A. Militar
Councillor Jose R. Mariano
Councillor Myrna G. L. Dalado-Oritz
Councillor Alberto T. Ungab
Councillor Lorenzo Benjamin D. Villafuerte
Councillor Trisha Ann J. Villafuerte
Councillor Jesus Joseph P. Zozobraño III

ABSENT:
Councillor Luna Maria Dominique S. Acosta
Councillor Bai Hundra Qessandra Dominique N. Advincula
Councillor Louie John J. Bonguyan - On Domestic Emergency Leave

ORDINANCE NO. 0290-23
Series of 2023
AN ORDINANCE UPGRADING THE HOUSING AND HOMESITE DEVELOPMENT DIVISION OF THE CITY PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT OFFICE INTO A DEPARTMENT OF THE CITY GOVERNMENT, TO BE KNOWN AS THE DAVAO CITY HOUSING OFFICE (DCHO)

--- [Page 2] ---
Page 2 of 20
Ord. No. 0290-23

Be it ordained by the Honorable Sangguniang Panlungsod of Davao City, in session assembled, that:

SECTION 1. TITLE - This Ordinance shall be known as "AN ORDINANCE UPGRAADING THE HOUSING AND HOMESITE DEVELOPMENT DIVISION OF THE CITY PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT OFFICE INTO A DEPARTMENT OF THE CITY GOVERNMENT, TO BE KNOWN AS THE DAVAO CITY HOUSING OFFICE (DCHO)".

SECTION 2. DECLARATION OF PRINCIPLES AND POLICIES - In part, the mandate of the City Government of Davao Citizen's Charter of 2023 states, "The priority thrusts and programs of the City Government of Davao are anchored on the basic principles of sustainable development that responds to the increasing needs of the public and the challenge of effectively and efficiently maintaining a dynamic administrative machinery that will realize the goals and objectives of the local government and the aspirations of its constituents."

The latest population census, conducted by the Philippine Statistics Office in 2020 for Davao City, was pegged at 1,776,949 people in an area of 244,361 hectares, more or less, distributed among 182 barangays. The population of Davao City has grown from 392,473 people in 1970 to the current population of approximately 1.8 million people. The Comprehensive Plan shall be formulated and implemented as this city continues to grow. The housing and urban development programs must be more comprehensive and instituted. The Local Housing Board recommended the creation of a housing office as a regular department of the city government to focus on solutions to sustainable programs for human settlements.

The Davao City Housing Office is created pursuant to the following principles and policies:

A. Article XIII, Section 9 of the 1987 Philippine Constitution provides, "The State shall, by law, and for the common good, undertake, in cooperation with the public sector, a continuing program of urban reform and housing which will make available at affordable cost decent housing and basic services to underprivileged and homeless citizens in urban centers and resettlement areas. It shall also promote adequate employment opportunities to such citizens. In the implementation of such program the State shall respect the rights of small property owners";

B. Article XIII, Section 10 of the 1987 Philippine Constitution likewise provides, "Urban or rural poor dwellers shall not be evicted nor their dwellings demolished, except in accordance with law and in a just and humane manner";

C. Section 76 of Republic Act No. 7160 states, "Organizational Structure and Staffing Pattern - Every local government unit shall design and implement its own organizational structure and staffing pattern taking into consideration its service requirements and financial capability, subject to the minimum standards and guidelines prescribed by the Civil Service Commission".

--- [Page 3] ---
Page 3 of 20
Ord. No. 0290-23
D. Section 77 of R.A. No. 7160 states, "The chief executive shall be responsible for human resources and development in his unit and shall take all personnel actions in accordance with the Constitutional provisions on civil service, pertinent laws, and rules and regulations thereon, including such policies, guidelines, and standards as the Civil Service Commission may establish." Provided that the local chief executive may employ emergency or casual employees or laborers paid on a daily wage or piecework basis and hired through job orders for local projects authorized by the Sanggunian concerned, without need of approval or attestation by the Civil Service Commission. Provided, further, that the period of employment of emergency or casual laborers as provided in this section shall not exceed six (6) months;"
E. Section 454 (c) (3) of Republic Act No. 7160, otherwise known as the Local Government Code of 1991 empowers the Sanggunian Panglungsod to create such offices as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of the City Government;
F. Section 458 (viii) of Republic Act No. 7160, otherwise known as the Local Government Code of 1991 states: "SECTION 458. Powers, Duties, Functions and Compensation. - (a) The sanggunian panglungsod, as the legislative body of the city, shall enact ordinances, approve resolutions and appropriate funds for the general welfare of the city and its inhabitants pursuant to Section 16 of this Code and in the proper exercise of the corporate powers of the city as provided for under Section 22 of this Code, and shall:
XXX
XXX
(vii) Determine the positions and the salaries, wages, allowances, and other emoluments and benefits of officials and employees paid wholly or mainly from city funds and provide for expenditures necessary for the proper conduct of programs, projects, services, and activities of the city government";
G. Section 325 (a) of R.A. No. 7160, otherwise known as the Local Government Code states: "General Limitations - The use of provincial, city, and municipal funds shall be subjected to the following limitations:
(a) The total appropriations, whether annual or supplemental, for personal services of a local government unit for one (1) fiscal year shall not exceed forty-five percent (45%) in the case of first to third class provinces, cities, and municipalities, and fifty-five percent (55%) in the case of fourth class or lower, the Sanggunian may grant additional regular resources for the next preceding fiscal year. The appropriations for salaries, wages, representation and transportation allowances of officials and employees of the public utilities and economic enterprises owned, operated, and maintained by the local government unit concerned shall not be included in the annual budget of at the completion of the maximum amount for personal services. The appropriations for the personal services of such economic enterprises shall be charged to their respective budgets;"

--- [Page 4] ---
Page 4 of 20
Ord. No. 0290-23

H. Article V, Section 22 of Davao City Ordinance No. 014-07, Series of 2007, otherwise known as the Shelter Code of Davao City provides, "The City Housing Office shall be the implementing body of the Shelter Programs of the City Government. The formulation of the Comprehensive Shelter Plan (CSP) shall be done in coordination with the City Housing Office";

I. Article III, Section 16, Paragraph 15 of Ordinance No. 014-07, Series of 2007, provides, "The Davao City Housing Board shall study and recommend for the strengthening of the present City Housing Office into a regular department";

J. The Davao City Local Housing Board (LHB) issued Resolution No. 14, Series of 2022, recommending to the City Council and the City Mayor for the creation of the City Housing Office as a regular City Government Department of Davao City;

K. Letter from the Office of the City Mayor dated January 10, 2022, addressed to Hon. J. Melchor B. Quilatin Jr., Vice Mayor of Davao City, signed by Acting City Administrator Atty. Francis M. Layog by authority of the City Mayor, requesting for legislative authority relative to the creation of the Davao City Housing Office (DCHO) with corresponding personnel complement, position titles and budgetary requirements;

L. DBM Budget Circular No. 2022-2 released on April 5, 2022, the subject of which is "Index of Occupational Services, Occupational Groups, Classes and Salary Grades (IOS), CY 2022 Edition" states:

"7.0 As a component of the Compensation and Position Classification System (CPCS), the Index of Occupational Services, Occupational Groups, Classes and Salary Grades (IOS for brevity) contains the list of classes or position titles existing in the government that are grouped by occupation. The IOS shall continually serve as the guide for national government agencies and certain GOCCs in determining the appropriate positions that will comprise their respective staffing pattern.

8.0 Conversely, in view of the peculiarity of its position classification plan, a separate IOS for local government units was issued under Local Budget Circular No. 137, dated July 13, 2021."

M. Civil Service Commission Memorandum Circular No. 14, Series of 2018, states, "In CSC Resolution No. 1701009 dated June 16, 2017, the Commission adopted and promulgated the 2017 Omnibus Rules on Appointments and Other Human Resource Actions (ORAORHA) to govern the preparation, submission of, and actions to be taken on appointments and other human resource movements in the Philippine Government";

To ensure that provisions of this policy are in accordance with other administrative issuances and pertinent laws, and to respond to the changing needs in human resource management, the Commission, pursuant to CSC Resolution No. 1800692, dated July 3, 2018, approved the amendments and additional provisions to the 2017 Omnibus Rules on Appointments and Other Human Resource Actions."

--- [Page 5] ---
Page 5 of 20
Ord. No. 029-23
N. CSC Memorandum Circular No. 12, Series of 2022, the subject of which is the
2022 Guidelines and Standards in the establishment of organizational
structures and staffing patterns in Local Government Units provides,
"Proxuant to CSC Resolution No. 2200377 promulgated on 20 September
2022, CSC adopts the 2022 Guidelines and Standards in the Establishment
of Organizational Structures and Staffing Patterns (OSSPs) in Local Government
Units (LGUs), as follows:
Pursuant to Section 76 of R.A. No. 7160, the CSC shall prescribe
minimum standards and guidelines in the design and
implementation of OSSPS in LGUs. It provides, as follows:
Section 76. Organizational Structure and Staffing Pattern.
Every local government unit shall design and implement
its own organizational structure and staffing pattern
taking into consideration its service requirements and
financial capability, subject to the minimum standards
and guidelines prescribed by the Civil Service Commission.
It is, therefore, the responsibility of every LGU to design,
approve, and implement its OSSP in accordance with the
following 2022 Guidelines and Standards in the Establishment
of OSSPS in LGUs";
O. Article I, Section 1 (f) of Republic Act No. 7279 provides, "Improve the
capability of local government units in undertaking urban development and
housing programs and projects";
P. Joint Circular No. 1, Series of 2017, which was jointly issued by the Civil
Service Commission, the Department of Budget and Management, and the
Commission on Audit provides the Rules and Regulations governing Contract
of Service and Job Order workers in the Government.
SECTION 3. DEFINITION OF TERMS AND ACRONYMS
COA
Commission on Audit
Contract of Service
Refers to the engagement of the services of an
individual, private firm, other government agency,
non-governmental agency or international organization
as consultant, learning service provider or technical
expert to undertake special project or job within a
specific time period as provided in Section 14 of R.A. No. 7279, jointly issued by the Civil Service Commission, the
Department of Budget and Management, and the
Commission on Audit|
Contractual
An employment status in the civil service determined by
an appointment or transfer to a person whose employment
in the government is in accordance with a special contract
to undertake local or foreign-assisted projects or a
specific work or job requiring special of technical skills
not available within the employing agency, to be
accomplished within a specific time period. (CSC
Memorandum Circular No. 24, Series of 2017)

--- [Page 6] ---
Page 6 of 20
Ord. No. 0290-23

| CPDO | City Planning and Development Office |
| CSC | Civil Service Commission |
| DBM | Department of Budget and Management |
| DBM IOS | DBM Index of Occupational Services, Occupational Groups, Grades and Salary Grades, CT 2022 Edition |
| DCHO | Division of Child and Youth Office |
| Department | A Department is the highest structural unit/level headed by an employee with the rank of "Department head" (CSC MC No. 12, s. 2022) |
| Division | A Division is the second highest structural unit/level and may be the same as sections performing dissimilar tasks but related functions headed by an employee with the rank of "Division Chief" (CSC MC No. 12, s. 2022) |
| HOA | Homeowner Association |
| Homeowners Association (HOA) | Refers to a non-profit, non-corporate corporation registered with the Department of Housing and represented with the Housing and Land Use Regulatory Board (HLRUB) or the Home Insurance Guarantee Corporation (now Home Guaranty Corporation) or the Securities and Exchange Commission, organized by owners or purchasers of a lot in a subdivision, tract, or parcel of property located within the jurisdiction of the association; or, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, unaffiliated, un

--- [Page 7] ---
Page 7 of 20
Ord. No. 0290-23

Human Settlements
Comprised of (a) Physical components of shelter and infrastructure; and (b) services to which the physical elements provide support, such as community services which include education, health, culture, welfare, recreation and nutrition (R.A. No. 11021 or An Act Creating the Department of Public Works and Urban Development Defining Its Mandate, Functions, and Appropriating Funds Therefor).

ISO
International Organization for Standardization

Job Order
Refers to piece work (pakayaw) or intermittent or emergency jobs such as clearing of debris on the roads, canals, waterways, etc., after natural/marine disasters, and other temporary jobs like trades and crafts: services such as carpentry, plumbing, electrical and the like. These jobs are of short duration and for a specific piece of work. (Joint Circular No. 1, Series of 2017, issued by the Civil Service Commission, Department of Budget and Management, and the Commission on Audit)

Local Government
Refers to the political subdivisions established by or in accordance with the Constitution (Executive Order No. 292 Administrative Code of 1987).

Local "Shelter Code"
Davao City Ordinance No. 017-07, Series of 2007, entitled "An Ordinance Establishing Comprehensive Urban Shelter Services Development Code of Davao City," otherwise known as the "Shelter Code" of Davao City

MC
Memorandum Circular

ORAOHRA
Omnibus Rules and Other Human Resource Actions

Permanent
An employment status in the civil service determined by an appointment status issued to a person who meets all the qualification requirements of the position to which he/she is being appointed to, including the appropriate eligibility, in accordance with provisions of law, rules and standards promulgated in public interest. (CSCS Memorandum Circular No. 24, Series of 2017)

Plantilla
Refers to a government appointment listing of positions in any governmental institution, instrumentality, and entity; both national and local; whether filled-up or vacant positions. Section 325 (e) of Republic Act No. 7160 states, "Positions in the official plantilla for career positions which are occupied by incumbents holding permanent appointments shall be covered by adequate appropriations."

Professional category
This category includes positions performing work requiring the exercise of profession or application of knowledge acquired through formal training in a particular field, such as the exercise of the creative and artistic ability or talent in arts and letters. Also included in this category are positions involved in research and application of professional knowledge and methods to a variety of technological, economic, social, industrial, and government functions. (DBM Budget Circular No. 2018-3, dated July 23, 2018)

--- [Page 8] ---
Page 8 of 20
Ord. No. 0290-23
Qualification standards Qualification standards are the minimum and basic requirements for positions in the government. These shall serve as the basic guide in the selection of personnel and in the evaluation of appointments to all positions in the government. (CSC Resolution No. 029092, dated October 29, 2003)
R.A. No. 7279 Republic Act No. 7279, also known as "An Act to Provide for a Comprehensive and Continuing Urban Development and Housing Program, Establish the Mechanism for Its Implementation, and for Other Purposes"
Section A Section is the lowest structural unit/level which may be composed of positions performing similar functions but by assignment with the rank of Section Chief (CSC MC No. 12, s. 2022)
Socialized Housing Refers to housing programs and projects covering houses and lots or home lots only, or residential condominium units undertaken by the government or the private sector for the underprivileged and homeless citizens which shall include sites and services development, long-term financing, liberalized mortgage interest rates, and other benefits in accordance with the provisions of this Act (Republic Act No. 10884, entitled "An Act Strengthening the Balanced Housing Development Program, Amending for the Purpose Republic Act No. 7279, As Amended, Otherwise known as the Urban Development and Housing Act of 1992")
Sub-professional category The sub-professional includes positions within structured work such as support, office operations or those engaged in crafts, trades, manual or clerical work. (DBM Budget Circular No. 2018-3, dated July 30, 2018)
Support Services May include janitorial, security, driving, data encoding, equipment and grounds maintenance and other services that support the day-to-day operations of the agency. (Joint Circular No. 1 Series of 2017, jointly issued by the Civil Service Commission, the Department of Budget and Management, and the Commission on Audit)
Transfer The movement of an employee from one position to another which is of equivalent rank, level or salary without gap in the service involving the issuance of an appointment. (2011 Omnibus Rules on Appointments and Other Human Resource Actions, Revised: July 2018)
Urban Areas Refer to all cities regardless of their population density and to municipalities with a population density of at least five hundred (500) persons per square kilometer (Section 3 (v) of R.A. No. 7279)

--- [Page 9] ---
Page 9 of 20
Ord. No. 0290-23
SECTION 4. CREATION OF THE DAVAO CITY HOUSING OFFICE (DCHO)
The Davao City Housing Office (DCHO) shall be created as a department of the City Government of Davao.
A. The Vision of DCHO is that it shall be a reliable institution in providing affordable, safe and decent housing to all sectors, promoting social inclusion, enhancing the quality of life for all Dabawenyo, and fostering sustainable communities through equitable access to basic utilities and services.
B. The Mission of DCHO is to efficiently and effectively develop sustainable communities and provide affordable, safe and decent housing, especially for the homeless, persons living in hazard-prone areas, and low-income families in Davao City, in partnership with key shelter agencies and the private sector.
C. The Goals of DCHO shall be the following:
1. To address the housing backlog of the City;
2. To identify and register beneficiaries from all the barangays of the city for socialized and economic human settlement programs, through the City Registration Committee;
3. To facilitate acquisition of housing units and land through balanced housing development and land banking;
4. To facilitate implementation of sustainable human settlement programs by the City, in coordination with concerned agencies and key shelter agencies.
D. The DCHO shall be composed of the following Divisions and their respective Sections:
1. Administrative and Support Services Division
a. Administrative Section;
b. General Services and Utilities Section;
2. Technical Planning and Development Management Division
a. Operations Section;
b. Committee and Technical Planning Section;
3. Estate Management Division
a. Real Property and Pricing Management Section;
b. Research and Planning Section;
4. Accounts Management Division
a. Records Assessment Section;
b. Inventory and Documentation Section;
5. Homeowners and Community Development Division
a. Census and Beneficiary Evaluation Section;
b. Homeowner Association (HOA) Management and Resettlement Section.

--- [Page 10] ---
Page 10 of 20
Ord. No. 0290-23

E. The DCHO shall be headed by a City Government Department Head II and assisted by a City Government Assistant Department Head II.

SECTION 5. FUNCTIONS OF THE DAVAO CITY HOUSING OFFICE (DCHO):

The Davao City Housing Office (DCHO) shall perform the following functions:

A. Carry out, oversee, manage, and administer the implementation of the Shelter Programs of the City Government of Davao in coordination with key shelter agencies and other concerned agencies:

1. Conduct Census Tagging and Interview to determine possible beneficiaries of the housing program/project of the city;
2. Register socialized and economic housing beneficiaries;
3. Establish and maintain a housing information system;
4. Assist in social preparation and community organizing to would-be housing beneficiaries;
5. Acquire lots through balanced housing development and land banking;
6. Facilitate documentary requirements and clearances for approval of Preliminary Subdivision Development Plan (PSDP) (formerly PALC) and Development Permits (DP) for City-owned settlement sites;
7. Facilitate the development of settlement sites with accessible basic services, community facilities, and livelihood opportunities, in coordination with other concerned agencies;
8. Facilitate the documentation process of the following:
   a. Lease Purchase Agreement;
   b. Agreement to Sell;
   c. Deed of Donation;
   d. Deed of Sale;
   e. Release and awarding of titles to settlement awardees;
9. Assist in Transfer of Title
   a. By hereditary succession;
   b. By donation;
   c. By sale;
   d. Cancellation of annotations/restrictions imposed in the title;
10. Issue Notice of Award, Statement of Accounts, and updating of payment records of the settlement awardees.
11. Issue Notice of Violation on the following:
   a. Non-awardees occupying within the settlement lots;
   b. Absentee owners;
   c. Awardees who leased and unlawfully sold the lots;
   d. Encroachment in Road Right-of-Way, easement, and open spaces within the settlement sites;
   e. Encroachment to adjacent lots;
12. Settle disputes on housing concerns within the settlement sites;
13. Assist in other housing-related concerns for endorsement to appropriate agencies;
14. Conduct inventory and monitoring of the settlement sites;

--- [Page 11] ---
Page 11 of 20
Ord. No. 0290-23

15. Assist and preliminarily evaluate homeowners associations on their application for Community Mortgage Program (CMP) and other housing programs.

B. Formulate and update the Local Shelter Plan in coordination with key shelter agencies and other national and local concerned agencies.

C. Act as the Technical Working Group and/or Secretariat to mandated housing related committees and councils.

D. Act on other matters that may be authorized by the Local Housing Board or the Local Chief Executive, pursuant to the provisions of Republic Act No. 7279 and the Davao City Local Shelter Code.

SECTION 6. FUNCTIONS OF THE DCHO DIVISIONS - The duties and functions of the DCHO divisions are as follows:

A. Administrative and Support Services Division

1. Prepares documentation related to housing as well as records and files of the office;

2. Crafts operational manual as framework/guide for effective and efficient day-to-day operation;

3. Responsible for maintaining ISO accreditation;

4. Facilitates capacity building, skills training and personnel development;

5. Incorporates Gender and Development (GAD) and disaster preparedness;

6. Develops Housing Information System;

7. Facilitates housing fairs in partnership with housing agencies and other stakeholders;

8. Facilitates housing summit highlighting best practices;

9. Responsible for sourcing of funds from funding agencies;

10. Responsible for sanitation and maintenance of the office and other designated facilities;

11. Responsible for transport, supply, and maintenance of vehicles, equipments and other materials;

12. Performs other functions according to established laws and procedures.

B. Technical Planning and Development Management Division

1. Updates and Completes the Local Shelter Plan;

2. Establishes housing code of policies and guidelines for all housing projects in coordination with the Local Housing Board;

3. Facilitates infrastructure and other programs of city-owned relocation sites;

4. Facilitates documentary requirements and clearances for approval of Preliminary Subdivision Development Plan (PSPD, formerly PALC) and Development Permits (DP) for City-owned settlement sites;

5. Inspects suitable lands for housing and properties;

6. Acquires lots through balanced housing development and land banking;

7. Preforms feasibility studies and project profiles on housing-related projects;

8. Establishes mandated housing committees;

9. Conducts studies on homesteal development;

10. Performs other functions according to established laws and procedures.

--- [Page 12] ---
Page 12 of 20  
Ord. No. 0290-23  

C. Estate Management Division  
1. Establishes pricing schemes through the Pricing Committee and other financial programs on relocation sites;  
2. Prepares and facilitates documentation of all housing projects;  
3. Investigates disputes on real properties and recommends them to the appropriate concerned agencies;  
4. Performs other functions according to established laws and procedures.  

D. Accounts Management Division  
1. Coordinates and oversees the efficient collection of fees from beneficiaries;  
2. Prepares and issues financial statements and other related documents;  
3. Conducts general assembly and inventory of lots;  
4. Prepares financial documents of housing-related projects;  
5. Coordinates with other related agencies on permits and other housing needs;  
6. Performs other functions according to established laws and procedures.  

E. Homeowners and Community Development Division  
1. Conducts Census Tagging and Interview to determine possible beneficiaries of the housing program/project of the city;  
2. Conducts orientation to beneficiaries of housing programs;  
3. Maintains documentation of all accredited Homeowners Associations of the city;  
4. Facilitates and establishes community relations;  
5. Develops and enhances linkages on social services and community development with other government agencies, non-government organizations, and other stakeholders;  
6. Performs other functions according to established laws and procedures.  

SECTION 7. FUNCTIONS OF THE DCHO SECTIONS PER DIVISION - The duties and functions of the respective sections for each division are as follows:  

A. Administrative and Support Services Division  
1. Administrative Section  
a. Prepares payroll and maintains payroll system;  
b. Prepares documents for the Performance and Compensation, Learning and Development, and Rewards and Recognition;  
c. Responsible for the Doc Tracking System and the flow of incoming and relocation applications;  
d. Responsible for maintaining the records of the City Housing personnel and other related concerns;  
e. Facilitates the preparation of project designs and other budgetary requirements;  
f. Prepares Purchase Requests and Purchase Orders to facilitate the office's requirements for equipment, supplies, repairs, meals, and other administrative needs;  
g. Responsible for data gathering and data repository of the department;  
h. In-charge of the Housing Information System;  
i. Performs other administrative functions as may be required.

--- [Page 13] ---
2. General Services and Utilities Section

a. Responsible for the sanitation and maintenance of the office;

b. Responsible for the vehicles and transport service of personnel, office supplies and equipment;

c. Performs other functions related to services and utilities as required.

B. Technical Planning and Development Management Division

1. Operations Section

a. Facilitates upgrading of structure, roads, drainage and others related to engineering works within the resettlement sites;

b. Conducts physical surveys, site inspections, and monitoring of housing structures, utilities and community facilities within the resettlement sites;

c. Prepares Notice of Violation on awards deeds encroaching in Road Right-of-Way easements, or other encroachments within the settlement sites;

d. Facilitates documentary requirements and clearances for approval of Preliminary Subdivision Development Plan (PSP, formerly PAC) and Development Permits (DP) for city-owned settlement sites;

e. Identifies potential areas/sites for housing project in coordination with other concerned agencies;

f. Performs other functions as may be required.

2. Research and Planning Section

a. Functions as the secretary of all the committees on the mandated housing related committees;

b. Responsible for the thematic plans and write-ups;

c. Facilitates in acquiring lots through balanced housing development and land banking in coordination with other concerned agencies;

d. Conducts feasibility studies and studies on homestile development;

e. Responsible for research and data analysis;

f. Performs other functions as may be required.

C. Estate Management Division

1. Real Property and Pricing Management Section

a. Responsible for documentation of the award and transfer of title;

b. Assists in Transfer of Titles;

c. Responsible for releasing of title to beneficiaries;

d. Responsible in determining the prices of the resettlement sites in coordination with other offices;

e. Performs other functions as may be required.

2. Dispute Settlement Section

a. Responsible for settling physical/documentary disputes among housing beneficiaries;

b. Investigates disputes involving real properties for indorsement to appropriate offices/agencies;

c. Performs other functions as may be required.

D. Accounts Management Division

1. Records Assessment Section

a. Responsible in billing, preparation of Statement of Accounts and servicing of loan accounts of the resettlement sites;

--- [Page 14] ---
Page 14 of 20
Ord. No. 0290-23

b. In-charge of the updating of ledgers and monthly amortization of the
resettlement sites;
c. In-charge of the preparation of Certificates for water and power connection and building permit applications;
d. Responsible for the financial reports;
e. Performs other functions as may be required.

2. Inventory and Documentation Section
a. Conducts General Assembly, documentation and lot inventory in
resettlement areas;
b. Prepares Notice of Violation for non-awardees, absentee-owners and
awardees who leased and unlawfully sold lots;
c. Formulates plans/strategies to ensure high Collection Efficiency Rate (CER);
d. Responsible for releasing Statement of Accounts to different HOA
members and beneficiaries;
e. Performs other functions as may be required.

E. Homeowners and Community Development Division
1. Census and Beneficiary Evaluation Section
a. Responsible for the Census Tagging and Interview;
b. Attends Dialogue and Pre-Demolition Conference;
c. Responsible in evaluating beneficiaries and its documents for resettlement programs;
d. Monitors the actual occupants of all resettlement areas;
e. In-charge of the registration and master list of beneficiaries of all
resettlement areas;
f. Performs other functions as may be required.

2. HOA Management and Resettlement Section
a. Responsible in assisting HOAs and any HOA related concerns;
b. Assists in the social preparation and community organizing of would-be
housing beneficiaries;
c. Facilitates the conduct of turnover and physical transfer of beneficiaries to the
resettlement site;
d. In-charge of the livelihood programs within the resettlement areas;
e. Performs other functions as may be required.

SECTION 8. ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE OF DCHO - Pursuant to Republic Act No. 7160, the rules and guidelines of the Civil Service Commission and the Department of Budget and Management, is the diagram of the organizational structure of DCHO, attached herein as "Annex A" as follows:

A. Department Administration
| Position Title | Designation | Remarks |
|----------------|--------------|---------|
| City Government Department Head II (SG-26) | Department Head of DCHO | Newly created position |
| City Government Assistant Department Head II (SG-24) | Assistant Department Head of DCHO | Newly created position |

--- [Page 15] ---
Page 15 of 20
Ord. No. 0290-23
B. Administrative and Support Services Division
Position Title | Designation | Remarks
Supervising Administrative Officer (Administrative Officer IV) (SG-22) | Division Head | Newly created position
1. Administrative Section
Position Title | Designation | Remarks
Information Systems Analyst II (SG-16) | Section Head | Newly created position
Development Management Officer I (SG-15) | Section Staff | Transfer from CPDO
Administrative Officer II (Administrative Officer I (SG-11)) | Section staff | Newly created position
2. General Services and Utilities Section
Position Title | Designation | Remarks
Administrative Officer III (Supply Officer I) (SG-14) | Section Head | Newly created position
Administrative Assistant II (Property Custodian (SG-8)) | Section staff | Newly created position
Administrative Aide IV (Driver ID) (SG-4) | Section staff | Newly created position
C. Technical Planning and Development Management Division
Position Title | Designation | Remarks
Development Management Officer IV (SG-22) | Division Head | Transfer from CPDO
1. Operations Section
Position Title | Designation | Remarks
Engineer II (SG-16) | Section Head | Newly created position
Engineer I (SG-12) | Section Staff | Newly created position
Development Management Officer I (SG-11) | Section Staff | Transfer from CPDO
2. Research and Planning Section
Position Title | Designation | Remarks
Development Management Officer III (SG-18) | Section Head | Newly created position
Development Management Officer II (SG-15) | Section Staff | Transfer from CPDO
Economist I (SG-11) | Section Staff | Newly created position
D. Estate Management Division
Position Title | Designation | Remarks
Housing and Homesteis Regulation Officer V (SG-22) | Division Head | Newly created position

--- [Page 16] ---
Page 16 of 20
Ord. No. 0290-23

1. Real Property and Pricing Management Section

| Position Title | Designation | Remarks |
|------------------|-------------|---------|
| Housing and Homeste |
| Regulation Officer IV (SG-19) | Section Head | Newly created position |
| Housing and Homeste |
| Regulation Officer III (SG-16) | Section Staff | Newly created position |
| Housing and Homeste |
| Regulation Officer II (SG-13) | Section Staff | Newly created position |

2. Dispute Settlement Section

| Position Title | Designation | Remarks |
|------------------|-------------|---------|
| Housing and Homeste Regulation |
| Officer III (SG-16) | Section Head | Newly created position |
| Housing and Homeste Regulation |
| Officer II (SG-13) | Section Staff | Newly created position |
| Housing and Homeste Regulation |
| Officer I (SG-11) | Section Staff | Newly created position |

E. Accounts Management Division

| Position Title | Designation | Remarks |
|------------------|-------------|---------|
| Development Management Officer IV (SG-22) | Division Head | Newly created position |

1. Records Assessment Section

| Position Title | Designation | Remarks |
|------------------|-------------|---------|
| Development Management Officer III (SG-18) | Section Head | Newly created position |
| Development Management Officer II (SG-15) | Section Staff | Transfer from CPDO |
| Development Management Officer I (SG-11) | Section Staff | Newly created position |

2. Inventory and Documentation Section

| Position Title | Designation | Remarks |
|------------------|-------------|---------|
| Development Management Officer II (SG-15) | Section Head | Newly created position |
| Development Management Officer I (SG-11) | Section Staff | Transfer from CPDO |
| Administrative Assistant II (Data Entry Machine Operator II) (SG-8) | Section Staff | Newly created position |

F. Homeowners and Community Development Division

| Position Title | Designation | Remarks |
|------------------|-------------|---------|
| Community Affairs Officer IV (SG-22) | Division Head | Newly created position |

--- [Page 17] ---
Page 17 of 20
Ord. No. 0290-23

1. Census and Beneficiary Evaluation Section
Position Title | Designation | Remarks
Development Management Officer III (SG-18) | Section Head | Transfer from CPDO
Development Management Officer II (SG-15) | Section Staff | Transfer from CPDO
Development Management Officer I (SG-11) | Section Staff | Transfer from CPDO

2. Homeowner Association (HOA) Management and Resettlement Section
Position Title | Designation | Remarks
Community Affairs Officer II (SG-15) | Section Head | Newly created position
Community Affairs Officer I (SG-11) | Section Staff | Newly created position
Community Affairs Assistant II (SG-8) | Section Staff | Newly created position

SECTION 9. CREATION OF REGULAR POSITIONS IN DCHO - Pursuant to the rules and guidelines of the Civil Service Commission (CSC) and the Department of Budget and Management (DBM), the following plantilla positions with the corresponding position titles, salary grades and number of positions are hereby created for DCHO:

A. Department Head
Position Title | Salary Grade | No. of Positions
City Government Department Head II | 26 | 1

B. Assistant Department Head
Position Title | Salary Grade | No. of Positions
City Government Assistant Department Head II | 24 | 1

C. Administrative and Support Services Division
Position Title | Salary Grade | No. of Positions
Supervising Administrative Officer (Administrative Officer IV) | 22 | 1
Information Systems Analyst II | 16 | 1
Administrative Officer II (Administrative Officer I) | 11 | 1
Administrative Assistant II (Property Custodian) | 8 | 1
Administrative Officer III (Supply Officer II) | 14 | 1
Administrative Aide IV (Driver II) | 4 | 1

--- [Page 18] ---
Page 18 of 20
Ord. No. 0290-23

D. Technical Planning and Development Management Division

| Position Title | Salary Grade | No. of Positions |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Development Management Officer III | 18 | 1 |
| Engineer II | 16 | 1 |
| Engineer I | 12 | 1 |
| Economist I | 11 | 1 |

E. Estate Management Division

| Position Title | Salary Grade | No. of Positions |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Housing and Homesite Regulation Officer V | 22 | 1 |
| Housing and Homesite Regulation Officer IV | 19 | 1 |
| Housing and Homesite Regulation Officer III | 16 | 2 |
| Housing and Homesite Regulation Officer II | 13 | 2 |
| Housing and Homesite Regulation Officer I | 11 | 1 |

F. Accounts Management Division

| Position Title | Salary Grade | No. of Positions |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Development Management Officer IV | 22 | 1 |
| Development Management Officer III | 18 | 1 |
| Development Management Officer II | 15 | 1 |
| Development Management Officer I | 11 | 1 |
| Administrative Assistant II (Data Entry Machine Operator II) | 8 | 1 |

G. Homeowners and Community Development Division

| Position Title | Salary Grade | No. of Positions |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Community Affairs Officer IV | 22 | 1 |
| Community Affairs Officer II | 15 | 1 |
| Community Affairs Officer I | 11 | 1 |
| Community Affairs Assistant II | 8 | 1 |

SECTION 10. HOUSING AND HOMESITE DEVELOPMENT DIVISION OF CPDO - The personnel, functions, duties, and responsibilities of the Housing and Homesite Development Division of the City Planning and Development Office (CPDO) shall be transferred to the Davao City Housing Office (DCHO) pursuant to CSC Omnibus Rules on Appointments and Other Human Resource Actions, and other pertinent rules and regulations.

A. The following positions from the Housing and Homesite Development Division of CPDO shall be transferred to DCHO:

1. One (1) position of Development Management Officer IV (SG-22);
2. Three (3) positions of Development Management Officer III (SG-18);
3. Four (4) positions of Development Management Officer II (SG-15);
4. Three (3) positions of Development Management Officer I (SG-11).

--- [Page 19] ---
Page 19 of 20  
Ord. No. 0290-23

B. The Housing and Homestite Development Division of the City Planning and Development Office (CDPO) is hereby abolished and its personnel, records, equipment and other assets transferred to the appropriate division/section of DCHO.

SECTION 11. APPOINTMENT AND QUALIFICATION - The plantilla of positions in DCHO under Section 9 and Section 10 of this Ordinance shall be appointed by the City Mayor, in accordance with Civil Service laws and rules that the appointee shall have met the qualification standards set by the Civil Service Commission on education, experience, training and eligibility as per attached "Annex B", and other competencies set by the Human Resource Management Office of the City. Qualification standards for any government position are subject to changes or updates through issuances by the Civil Service Commission.

SECTION 12. MANPOWER COMPLEMENT - The City Mayor shall be allowed to hire additional workers for DCHO as Job Orders (JO) or Contract of Services (COS) employees, pursuant to Section 77 R.R. No. 7160, otherwise known as the Local Government Code of 1991, and pertinent government budgeting, accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

SECTION 13. APPROPRIATION - The City Government of Davao shall ensure the appropriation of funds for the Davao City Housing Office (DCHO) pursuant to government budgeting, accounting and auditing rules and regulations. An annual budget of Twenty-Six Million Four Hundred Thirty Thousand Five Hundred Sixty-seven Pesos and Sixteen Cents (P26,430,576.26) more or less, shall be appropriated for the Personnel Services of DCHO, of which Six Million One Hundred Thirty-seven Thousand Nine Hundred Sixteen Pesos and Sixteen Cents (P6,137,916.16) more or less, shall be allocated to the Salary appropriation part of the Personnel Services of the Annual Budget through CDPO. An additional appropriation of Twenty Million Two Hundred Ninety-two Thousand Six Hundred Fifty-nine Pesos and Forty-One Hundred (P20,292,659.45) more or less, is needed to fulfill the Personnel Services requirement of DCHO (Annex "C").

The appropriation for Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses (MOOE), Capital Outlays, Comprehensive Shelter Program, mandated housing-related committees, and other related activities and programs shall be appropriated based on the availability of budget.

SECTION 14. REPEALING CLAUSE - All orders, rules and regulations, issuances or any part thereof inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

SECTION 15. SEPARABILITY CLAUSE - If, for any reason, any section or part of this Ordinance is held unconstitutional or invalid, other sections or provisions not otherwise affected shall remain in full force and effect.

SECTION 16. EFFECTIVITY - This Ordinance shall take effect upon approval.

ENACTED, on the 12th day of September 2023, by a unanimous vote of all the Members of the Sanggunian, there being a quorum.

--- [Page 20] ---
Page 20 of 20
Ord. No. 0290-23
CERTIFIED CORRECT:
For and in the absence of the Secretary:
MA. THERESA A. REYES
Acting Secretary to the Sangguniang Panlungsod
(Assistant Secretary to the Sangguniang Panlungsod)
ATTESTED:
J. MELCHOR B. QUITAIN JR.
Vice Mayor
Presiding Officer
mtar/kjtq
APPROVED: 2023
SEBASTIAN Z. DUTERTE
City Mayor
ATTESTED:
ATTY. FRANCIS MARK H. LAYOG
Acting City Administrator
AN ORDINANCE UPGRAADING THE HOUSING AND HOMESITE DEVELOPMENT DIVISION OF
THE CITY PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT OFFICE INTO A DEPARTMENT OF THE CITY
GOVERNMENT, TO BE KNOWN AS THE DAVAO CITY HOUSING OFFICE (DCHO)