=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 000417-10 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
15th City Council
16th Regular Session
Series of 2010

Republika ng Pilipinas
SANGGUNIANG PANLUNGSOOD
Lungao ng Dabaw

PRESENT:

Vice-Mayor Sara Z. Duterte
- Presiding Officer
Councilor Nilo G. Abellera
Councilor Ma. Belen S. Acosta
Councilor Victoria S. Advincula Sr.
Councilor Wilberto E. Al-ag
Councilor Jose A. Alcazar Jr.
Councilor Leonardo R. Avila III
Councilor Conrado C. Bahuran
Councilor Samuel B. Bangoy
Councilor Karl S. Bello
Councilor Louis John J. Bonguyan
Councilor Juan B. Cabral
Councilor Arnoldo Ricardo B. Cabaling
Councilor Paolo Z. Duterte
Councilor Edgar R. Inuyan
Councilor Peter T. Lavina
Councilor Diosdado C. Legaspi A. Malhiupus Sr.
Councilor Manuel M. Maranason
Councilor Bonifacio E. Militar
Councilor Susan Isabel C. Reta
Councilor Halila Y. Sudagar
Councilor Angela A. Librada-Trinidad
Councilor Jose Louis F. Villafuerte
Councilor Rachel P. Zambrano

ABSENT:

Councilor Danilo C. Dayanghirang
- On Domestic Emergency Leave
Councilor Tomas J. Monteverde IV
- On Sick Leave
Councilor Myrna G. L' Dalado-Ortiz
- On Domestic Emergency Leave

ORDINANCE NO. 0417-10
Series of 2010

OLDER PERSONS WELFARE CODE OF DAVAO CITY

Be it ordained by the Sangguniang Panlungsod of Davao City in session
assembled that:

ARTICLE I
TITLE OF THE ORDINANCE

Section 1. Short Title. This Ordinance shall be known as the "Older
Persons Welfare Code of Davao City."

--- [Page 2] ---
Page 2 of 20
Ord. No. 0417-10
ARTICLE II DECLARATION OF POLICY
Section 2. Declaration of Policy. It is the policy of Davao City to protect the rights and welfare of senior citizens and afford them the privileges provided under the Constitution and special laws, such as those under Republic Act 78/76 ("Senior Citizens Center Act of the Philippines") and Republic Act 9994 ("Expanded Senior Citizens Act of 2010"), incorporating as well the United Nations' Principles for Older Persons in its city's programs addressing the needs, concerns and interests of Older Persons;
Section 3. Adoption of the United Nations Principles for Older Persons. The City shall adopt the United Nations' "Principles for Older Persons" enunciated under Resolution 37/51 issued by the General Assembly on December 3, 1982. The following are the eighteen (18) principles that are hereby adopted:
A) INDEPENDENCE
a) Older persons should have access to adequate food, water, shelter, clothing and health care through the provision of income, family and community support and self-help;
b) Older persons should have the opportunity to work or have access to other income-generating opportunities;
c) Older persons should be able to participate in determining when and at what pace should withdrawal from the labor force will take place;
d) Older persons should have access to appropriate educational training programs;
e) Older persons should be able to live in environments that are safe and adaptable to personal preferences and changing capacities;
f) Older persons should be able to reside at home for as long as possible;
B) PARTICIPATION
g) Older persons should remain integrated in society, participate actively in the formulation and implementation of policies that directly affect their well-being and share their knowledge and skills with younger generations;
h) Older persons should be able to seek and develop opportunities for service to the community and to serve as volunteers in positions appropriate to their interests and capabilities;
i) Older persons should be able to form movements or associations of older persons;
C) CARE
j) Older persons should benefit from family and community care and protection in accordance with each society's system of cultural values;
k) Older persons should have access to health care to help them maintain or regain the optimum level of physical, mental and emotional well-being and to prevent or delay the onset of illness;

--- [Page 3] ---
Page 3 of 20
Ord. No. 0417-10

I) Older persons should have access to social and legal services to enhance their autonomy, protection, and care;
m) Older persons should be able to utilize appropriate levels of institutional care providing protection, rehabilitation, social and mental stimulation in a humane and secure environment;
n) Older persons should be able to enjoy human rights and fundamental freedoms when residing in any shelter, care or treatment facility, including full respect for their dignity, beliefs, needs and privacy and for the right to make decisions about their care and the quality of their lives;

D) SELF-FULFILLMENT

o) Older persons should be able to pursue opportunities for the full development of their potential;
p) Older persons should have access to the educational, cultural, spiritual and recreational resources of society;

E) DIGNITY

q) Older persons should be able to live in dignity and security and be free from exploitation and physical or mental abuse;
r) Older persons should be treated fairly, regardless of age, gender, racial or ethnic background, disability or other status, and valued independently of their economic contribution;

ARTICLE III
DEFINITION OF TERMS

Section 4. Definition of Terms. As used in this Ordinance, the following terms are defined as follows:

a) CDA - Cooperative Development Authority;
b) City DILG - City Department of Interior and Local Government;
c) CSSDO - City Social Services Development Office;
d) NGO - Non-Government Organizations;
e) NOMSELECT - Nomination and Selection Committee;
f) Older Persons/Senior Citizens/Elderly - It shall mean any citizen of the Philippines who is at least 60 years old; (The terms are used interchangeably in this Code)
g) PO - Private Organizations;
h) OSCA - Office for Senior Citizens Affairs;
i) Rehabilitation - It is the restoration of the physical, mental and social ability of a person following illness, disease or injury;
j) SSEC - Securities and Exchange Commission.

--- [Page 4] ---
**Page 4 of 20**

**Ord. No. 0417-10**

**ARTICLE IV**

**PARTICIPATION**

**Section 5. Office for Senior Citizens Affairs (OSCA).** The Office for Senior Citizens Affairs (OSCA) is hereby strengthened to ensure the integration and participation of Older Persons in the formulation and implementation of policies directly affecting their well-being.

**Section 6. Chairperson of the Office for Senior Citizens Affairs (OSCA).** The OSCA shall be chaired by a senior citizen who shall be appointed by the City Mayor for a term of three (3) years without reappointment from a list of three (3) nominees submitted by the Sangguniang Panlungsod through a resolution;

The Chairperson shall be assisted by the City Social Services Development Office (CSSDO) in coordination with the Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD). He/She shall be entitled to receive an honorarium in the amount at least equivalent to Salary Grade 22;

**Section 7. Selection Procedure of the Nominees for the position of Chairperson of the Office for Senior Citizens Affairs (OSCA).** The following procedure shall be complied with in the selection of the nominees for the position of Chairperson of the Office for Senior Citizens Affairs (OSCA):

a) The nominees for the OSCA Chairperson shall be chosen/recommended in a general assembly by and among the members of the various Senior Citizen's Chapter Organizations in the City of Davao duly registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) or Cooperative Development Authority (CDA) and the City Social Services Development Office (CSSDO);

b) Only a Senior Citizen's Chapter Organization with a track record of at least three (3) years prior to the date of nomination and selection procedure shall be allowed to make a single nomination;

c) The nominee must be a bona fide member of the nominating organization for at least one (1) year prior to his/her nomination;

d) The nominees from each of the various Senior Citizen's Organization shall be endorsed to the Sangguniang Panlungsod through the Committee on Social Services;

e) The Nomination and Selection Committee (NOMSELECT) of the Sangguniang Panlungsod shall then select three (3) nominees from and among the nominees submitted by the different Senior Citizen's Organizations;

f) Upon approval of the Sangguniang Panlungsod in a resolution, the names of the three (3) nominees shall be submitted to the City Mayor who shall then appoint the Chairperson of the Office for Senior Citizens Affairs (OSCA);

**Section 8. Composition of the Nomination and Selection Committees (NOMSELECT) of the Sangguniang Panlungsod.** The Nomination and Selection Committee (NOMSELECT), which shall select and submit the names of the three (3) nominees to the Sangguniang Panlungsod shall be composed of:

- One (1) representative of the City Mayor;
- One (1) representative of the City Council;
- One (1) representative of the City Social Services Development Office;
- One (1) representative of the Department of Social Welfare and Development;
- One (1) representative of the Department of Education;
- One (1) representative of the Department of Health;
- One (1) representative of the Department of Labor and Employment;
- One (1) representative of the Department of Transportation and Communications;
- One (1) representative of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources;
- One (1) representative of the Department of Science and Technology;
- One (1) representative of the Department of Interior and Local Government;
- One (1) representative of the Department of Public Works and Highways;
- One (1) representative of the Department of Energy;
- One (1) representative of the Department of Trade and Industry;
- One (1) representative of the Department of Justice;
- One (1) representative of the Department of Foreign Affairs;
- One (1) representative of the Department of Defense;
- One (1) representative of the Department of Interior and Local Government;
- One (1) representative of the Department of Public Works and Highways;
- One (1) representative of the Department of Energy;
- One (1) representative of the Department of Trade and Industry;
- One (1) representative of the Department of Justice;
- One (1) representative of the Department of Foreign Affairs;
- One (1) representative of the Department of Defense;
- One (1) representative of the Department of Interior and Local Government;
- One (1) representative of the Department of Public Works and Highways;
- One (1) representative of the Department of Energy;
- One (1) representative of the Department of Trade and Industry;
- One (1) representative of the Department of Justice;
- One (1) representative

--- [Page 5] ---
Page 5 of 20
Ord. No. 0417-10
a) The City Director of the Department of Interior and Local Government,
City Field Office, or his duly authorized representative as Chairperson;
b) The City Administrator or his duly authorized representative as member;
c) The Chairperson, SP Committee on Social Services as member;
d) The Chairperson of the Office for Senior Citizens Affairs (OSCA) or
his/her representative as member;
e) The representative of the City Social Services and Development Office
(CSSDO) as member;
The Office of the Senior Citizens Affairs (OSCA) and the City Social
Services and Development Office (CSSDO) shall provide the technical and
secretarial services during the conduct of the General Assembly;
Section 9. Qualifications of the nominees for the OSCA Chairperson.
The nominees for the OSCA Chairperson shall possess the following qualifications:
a) A Filipino citizen and a resident of Davao City for at least one (1) year
prior to his nomination;
b) A registered voter of Davao City. The nominee shall submit a voter's
affidavit or a certification from the Commission on Election that he/she
is a registered voter of Davao City;
c) Must be physically and mentally fit. To this effect, the nominee is
required to submit the original copy of his/her medical certificate duly
issued by a licensed government physician showing that the nominee is
physically and mentally fit to serve the office;
d) A bona fide member for at least one (1) year of a duly accredited Senior
Citizen's Chapter Organization with a track record of a least three (3)
years prior to his/her nomination. To this effect, the nominee shall
submit a resolution of his/her chapter organization nominating him/her
as OSCA Chairperson and certifying that he/she is a member of good
standing for at least one (1) year prior to his/her nomination;
Section 10. Supervision and Assistance of OSCA. The Office of the City
Mayor shall exercise supervision over the OSCA relative to its plans, programs,
projects, and activities for senior citizens;
Section 11. Functions of OSCA. The Office for Senior Citizens Affairs
(OSCA) shall have the following functions:
a) To plan, implement and monitor yearly work programs in pursuance of
the objectives of Republic Act No. 9994, the "Expanded Senior Citizens
Act of 2010," and other laws;
b) To draw up a list of available and required services which can be
provided by OSCA, other government agencies, and private entities for
older persons;
c) To maintain and regularly update on a quarterly basis the list of senior
citizens and to establish, manage and preserve a database of all older
persons in Davao City containing their profile including their

--- [Page 6] ---
Page 6 of 20
Ord. No. 0417-10

competences, skills, capabilities and other relevant information for the purpose of this Ordinance;

d) To issue nationally uniform individual identification cards and purchase booklet, free of charge, which shall be valid anywhere in the country;

e) To serve as a general information and liaison center to serve the needs of the senior citizens;

f) To monitor compliance with the provisions of R.A. No. 9994 particularly the grant of special discounts and privileges to senior citizens;

g) To report to the City Mayor establishments found violating any provision of R.A. No. 9994;

h) To assist senior citizens in filing complaints or charges against any person, natural or juridical, establishment, institution, or agency refusing to comply with the privileges under the Act before the Department of Justice or the provincial, city or municipal trial courts;

i) To assist and coordinate with the concerned individual, establishment, institution or agency investigating fraudulent practices and abuses of the discounts and privileges exclusively granted to senior citizens;

j) To establish linkages and work together with accredited Non-Government Organizations (NGOs), Peoples Organizations (POs), and the barangays in their respective areas;

k) To assist, accept and process burial assistance and benefits for World War veterans and indigent older persons;

l) To provide free entertainment or amusement benefits and/or activities such as free movie passes, free tickets to shows and sports events, free rides, and the like;

m) To perform such other functions that may be tasked for them to perform;

Section 12. Organizational Structure of the Office for Senior Citizens Affairs (OSCA). The Office for Senior Citizens Affairs (OSCA) shall have an organizational structure comprising of the Office of the City Mayor as head followed by the OSCA chairperson, working in close coordination with the CSSDO and the Federation of Senior Citizens;

Under the OSCA shall be a Board of Advisers followed by an Administrative Officer together with his/her administrative staff divided into the following sections namely: (1) Operations and Database Section; (2) Technical, Legal and Emergency Section; and (3) Administrative and Advocacy Section;

Attached herewith is the flow-chart indicating the Organizational Structure of the OSCA marked as Annex "A".

Section 13. Composition of the Office for Senior Citizens Affairs (OSCA) Board of Advisers. An OSCA Board of Advisers is hereby created that shall be composed of the OSCA Chairperson and the following board members, namely: representative from the City Administrator's Office, representative from the City Social Services and Development Office (CSSDO), representative from the City Health Office (CHO), representative from the City Department of Interior and Local Government (City DILG), representative from the City Legal

--- [Page 7] ---
Page 7 of 20
Ord. No. 0417-10
Office, two (2) representatives from Non-Government Organizations (NGOs), two (2) representatives from known Advocates on Older Persons Concerns, and the Federation President of the Davo City Federation of Senior Citizens Association. They shall regularly meet every quarter or as often as needed as called by the OSCA Chairperson;
There shall be a Secretariat for the Board which shall be provided by the Office for Senior Citizens Affairs assisted by the City Social Services and Development Office (CSSDO);
Section 14. Powers and Functions of the OSCA Board of Advisors. The OSCA Board of Advisors shall have the following powers and functions:
a) To serve as a consultative body in making policy recommendations regarding the implementation and enforcement of all laws relative to the promotion of older persons' welfare to the Office for Senior Citizens Affairs (OSCA);
b) To introduce, develop, and evaluate the programs and services initiated by the OSCA for the general welfare of the older persons;
c) To perform such other functions as provided by law or ordinance.
Section 15. Staffing Pattern of the Office for Senior Citizens Affairs (OSCA). The following positions are hereby created and established:
| NUMBER | POSITION | SALARY GRADE |
|---------|-----------|--------------|
| 1       | Administrative Officer III | 18 |
| 1       | Administrative Officer II | 15 |
| 1       | Administrative Officer I | 11 |
| 1       | Clerk IV | 8 |
| 2       | Clerk III | 6 |
| 3       | Clerk II | 4 |
| 9       | Plantilla Positions | |
Section 16. Creation of Other Positions. Other positions may be created after an evaluation shall be made following a three-year program. Position titles should conform with the listed positions in the Index of Occupational Services pursuant to circulars/issuances from the Department of Budget and Management (DBM);

--- [Page 8] ---
Page 8 of 20
Ord. No. 0417-10

Section 17. Administrative Officer III. The Administrative Officer III shall assist the OSCA Head in the implementation of R.A. 9994 together with other laws, rules and regulations for the benefit of the older persons. Furthermore, he/she shall assist the OSCA head in the day to day personnel administration and office management. He/she shall likewise perform all the other duties and functions delegated to him/her by the OSCA Head. He/she shall have the Salary Grade (SG) of 16;

Section 18. Administrative Officer II. The Administrative Officer II shall supervise the over-all implementation of the issuance of the Senior Citizens Identification Cards (IDs) and replacement of lost IDs. He/she shall approve the issuance of these IDs. Moreover, he/she shall perform all other duties and functions that may be delegated to him/her by the OSCA Head. He/she shall have the Salary Grade (SG) of 15;

Section 19. Administrative Officer I. The Administrative Officer I shall provide assistance and information to older persons applying for IDs. He/she shall evaluate and recommend the approval of applications for IDs and replacement of lost IDs. Furthermore, he/she shall gather and make a database of older persons as mandated under this Code. He/she shall perform all other duties and functions that may be delegated to him/her by the OSCA Head. He/she shall have the Salary Grade (SG) of 11;

Section 20. Clerk IV. The Clerk IV shall process and prepare the applications for burial assistance and benefits of World War Veterans and indigenous claimants. He/she has the Salary Grade (SG) of 8;

Section 21. Clerk III. There shall be two (2) persons appointed to the position of Clerk III. One shall process and prepare the materials, forms, medicines' purchase slips and other purchase slips as well as booklet to be issued by the OSCA. Moreover, he/she shall likewise perform other duties and functions delegated to him/her by the Administrative Officer III. He/she shall have the Salary Grade (SG) of 6;

Section 22. The other person stated in the preceding section, having a position of Clerk III, shall be in charge of the processing of lost senior citizens' identification cards and shall likewise perform other duties and functions delegated to him/her by the Administrative Officer III. He/she shall have the Salary Grade (SG) of 6;

--- [Page 9] ---
Page 9 of 20
Ord. No. 0417-10

Section 23. Clerk II. Three (3) personnel shall be appointed to the position of Clerk II. They shall process the applications, issuance and recording of Senior Citizens IDs representing the three (3) districts of Davao. They shall also perform other duties and functions delegated by the Administrative Officer III. They shall have the Salary Grade (SG) of 4;

Section 24. Right to association and affiliation. Older persons are encouraged to form associations and organizations for their mutual aid and protection. However, to be able to conduct activities and participate in city-initiated programs, these associations and organizations must be accredited and recognized by the CSSDO;

Section 25. City Federation of Senior Citizens Association. Older persons who have formed associations or organizations in the barangays and districts must affiliate with the city federation of senior citizens association or after getting their accreditation from the City Social Services and Development Office (CSSDO). The CSSDO shall be the secretariat of the federation;

Section 26. Relationship between the OSCA and the City Federation of Senior Citizens Association. The City Federation of Senior Citizens Association shall assist OSCA in the foregoing functions:

a) To assist and to secure that nationally uniform identification cards are provided and issued by the OSCA;

b) To comment, recommend, monitor and assist in the development of standards for the programs and services performed by the OSCA;

c) To provide technical assistance and monitor services and projects to be undertaken by the OSCA;

Section 27. Representation of the Older Persons Sector in the Barangay Development Council. The Older Persons Sector shall be represented in the

--- [Page 10] ---
Page 10 of 20
Ord. No. 0417-10

Barangay Development Council by at least one (1) representative chosen by the Barangay Development Council from all the older persons organizations or chapters in the barangay;

Section 28. Representation of the Older Persons Sector in the City Development Council: The Older Persons Sector shall have at least one (1) representative who shall be the City Federation President or his/her duly authorized representative in the City Development Council;

ARTICLE V INDEPENDENCE

Section 29. Work Opportunities: Older persons must have the opportunity to work or to have access to other income-generating opportunities. In this regard, age alone shall not be the sole reason for not hiring an able and willing older person seeking opportunity to work in the City of Davao. They should be able to participate in determining when and at what pace should withdrawal from the labor force will take place;

Furthermore, the City shall prioritize the hiring of older persons who are still able to work and are qualified to work in vacant positions in the government service;

Section 30. Wages, allowances and benefits: Older persons shall be entitled to wages, allowances and benefits for employees mandated under the Labor Code and other special laws;

Section 31. Creation of the Older Persons Employability Desk: The City, through the Office for Senior Citizens Affairs, shall establish an Older Persons Employability Desk under the OSCA;

Section 32. Powers and duties of the Older Persons Employability Desk: The Older Persons Employability Desk shall have the following powers and duties:

a) To help provide job placement for older persons who have the capacity and desire to work or to be re-employed;

b) To offer and make available to interested employers and others, information and matching services on the available professional and non-professional services that may be offered by older persons;

c) To monitor, receive and assist in addressing complaints relative to cases involving senior citizens who were removed by their employer without due process of law especially those exempted by virtue of the provisions on compulsory retirement age;

Section 33. Accessibility of Facilities: Older persons must be able to live in an environment that is safe, adaptable and accessible to personal preferences and changing capacities;

In this regard, the City must require all public and private buildings for public use, educational institutions, airports, sports and recreation centers and complexes, shopping centers, establishments, public parking places, work-places and public utilities to install facilities or structural features that

--- [Page 11] ---
Page 11 of 20
Ord. No. 0417-10

enhance the mobility of older persons such as sidewalks, ramps, railings and the like.

Furthermore, the City shall require all public and private buildings for public use, educational institutions, airports, sports and recreation centers and complexes, shopping centers or establishments, public parking places, work-places and public utilities to provide additional chairs, benches, and wheelchairs in such areas where it is necessary for the older person to have the need to rest after using the facilities or the structural features that enhance their mobility. These chairs, benches, and wheel chairs shall have a notice to the public that these are provided for the exclusive use of older persons.

These facilities or structural features of mobility, chairs, benches and wheel chairs shall be a requirement for the issuance of the city's building permits.

Section 34. Availability of all facilities for disabled citizens to older persons. All the facilities provided for the use of disabled persons like comfort rooms, parking spaces, wheel chairs and the like shall be readily available for the use of older persons in consideration of their special needs in accordance with Batas Pambansa No. 344 or the "Accessibility Law of the Philippines".

Section 35. Older persons' express lanes or priority. Express lanes privileges for older persons shall be provided in all private, commercial and government establishments especially in pharmacies, groceries and the like. In the absence thereof, priority shall be given to them;

Section 36. Older Persons' Assistance Counter or Officer of the Day for Older Persons in transportation terminals and ports. The City shall establish an Older Persons' Assistance Counter or shall designate an Officer of the Day for Older Persons in transportation terminals and ports. To assist and give priority to the special needs and concerns of older persons.

Section 37. Platforms and ramps in public utility vehicles. The City shall encourage operators of public utility vehicles to provide platforms and/or ramps to aid older persons in boarding and alighting from said vehicles.

Section 38. Devices in public conveyances. In case of public conveyance, devices such as the prominent display of posters or stickers shall be used to generate public awareness of the rights of the older persons and foster understanding of their special needs. Special bus stops shall be designated for older persons and disabled persons alike.

Section 39. Adjusting the display of poster, stickers, decals and signs. The City shall encourage proprietors and owners of establishments to adjust the display of posters, stickers, decals and signs like those found on the doors of comfort rooms to a level that is within view of older persons in consideration of those who are suffering from osteoporosis and similar ailments;

Section 40. Color Scheme to identify older persons' facilities, express lanes, and devices. The City shall encourage all private, commercial, industrial and government establishments to color all older persons' facilities, express lanes and devices, with yellow being the color that is scientifically proven to be the last distinguishable color by visually-impaired older persons,

--- [Page 12] ---
Page 12 of 20
Ord. No. 0417-10

Section 41. Older persons' logo in older persons' facilities, express lanes, and devices. To further facilitate the identification of older persons' facilities, express lanes and devices, the city shall encourage all private, commercial, industrial and government establishments to install yellow signages with logo to be determined by the Office for Senior Citizens Affairs (OSCA) subject to the approval of the City Mayor;

Section 42. Older Persons' Emergency Response Division in cases of disasters and emergencies. The Office of the Senior Citizens Affairs (OSCA) shall undertake to secure that older persons are treated with proper and immediate care in times of emergencies, disasters, calamities and climate change activities. These activities are undertaken in coordination with the City Social Services Development Office (CSSDO) and the City Health Office (CHO);

Section 43. Burial Assistance and Benefits for World War Veterans and Indigent Older Persons. The City, through the Office for Senior Citizens Affairs (OSCA), shall provide burial assistance and benefits for World War Veterans and indigent older persons in the City of Davao;

Section 44. Entertainment and Amusement Benefits to Older Persons. The City shall encourage private individuals, companies and institutions to grant entertainment and amusement benefits to older persons such as free movie passes, free tickets to shows and sports events, free rides, and the like,

ARTICLE VI CARE

Section 45. Filial Responsibility. Adult children shall have the primary duty to care for their indigent parents who are older persons as herein defined in this Code by being financially responsible for their basic needs and health care. An indigent is one whose income is below the subsistence level as determined by the National Economic Development Authority (NEDA). In case the child is unable to fulfill this obligation, the filial responsibility shall rest upon other responsible caretakers of older persons in keeping with our Filipino cultural values;

Section 46. Health and Rehabilitation Care. Older persons shall have access to health and rehabilitation care to help them maintain or maximize the optimum level of physical, mental and emotional well-being and to prevent or delay the onset of illness. Moreover, health and rehabilitation services must be available in the community;

Section 47. Older Persons' Assistance Bench or Officer of the Day for Older Persons in Hospitals. There shall be an older persons' assistance desk or officer of the day in hospitals, both in private and in public, to address the immediate and exceptional concerns of older persons;

Section 48. Institutional Care. Institutional care must be established to provide older persons with protection, rehabilitation, social and mental stimulation in a humane and secure environment. The City Government, through the City Social Services and Development Office (CSSDO) and the City Health Office (CHO), must provide complete institutional care or intervention for abandoned, neglected and abused including those with mental disorders (e.g. dementia) and other conditions that require special treatment to, facilities, equipment, programs and services. A multi-disciplinary staff to

--- [Page 13] ---
Page 13 of 20
Ord. No. 0417-10

include doctors, psychologists, social workers, nurses, nutritionists and other health personnel shall be hired;

Section 49. Community-Based Care. The City Health Office (CHO) and City Social Services and Development Office (CSSDO) shall institute programs in advancing the health and well-being of older persons. It shall train community-based health workers and, but not limited to, senior citizens and health personnel to specialize in geriatric care for problems of senior citizens. The CHO and CSSDO may collaborate with private institutions including, but not limited to, agencies and non-governmental organizations;

Section 50. Geriatric Health & Rehabilitation Care Section. All city-funded and private hospitals, barangay health centers and other health care facilities in Devano City shall be encouraged to set up a Geriatric Health & Rehabilitation Care Section, and/or Older Persons' Assistance bench;

Furthermore, the City shall ensure that free medicines and free medical services are readily available to indigent older persons of Devano City;

Section 51. Training programs to address the needs of older persons in times of emergency and/or disasters in hospitals and in all disaster coordinating centers. The City Health Office (CHO) and the City Social Services and Development Office (CSSDO) shall institute older persons' disaster training programs in hospitals and in all disaster coordinating centers to address the appropriate intervention for the particular needs and concerns of older persons in times of emergency;

Section 52. Social Enhancement Services. Older persons shall have access to social services to enhance their autonomy, protection and care.

In this regard, the City Social Services and Development Office (CSSDO), in cooperation with the Office for Senior Citizens Affairs (OSCA), non-governmental organizations and people's organizations for senior citizens, shall develop and implement programs on social services for senior citizens, the components of which are the following:

a) Self and social enhancement services which provide senior citizens opportunities for socializing, organizing, creative expression, and improvement of self;

b) After-care and follow-up services for senior citizens who are discharged from the homes/ institutions for the aged, especially those who have problems of reintegration with family and community, wherein both the senior citizens and their families are provided with counseling;

c) Neighborhood support services wherein the community family members provide care-giving services to their frail, sick, or bedridden senior citizens and those who are caring for themselves disabilities; and

d) Substitute family care in the form of residential care/group homes for the abandoned, neglected, mentally retarded, unattached or homeless senior citizens and those incapable of self-care.

--- [Page 14] ---
Page 14 of 20
Ord. No. 0417-10
ARTICLE VII
DIGNITY
Section 53. Older Persons' Abuse: Older persons' abuse is any form of mistreatment that results in harm or loss to older persons. The forms of older persons' abuse may be any of the following:
a) Physical abuse is a physical force that results in bodily injury, pain, or impairment. It includes assault, battery, and inappropriate restraint;
b) Sexual abuse is non-consensual sexual contact of any kind with an older person;
c) Domestic violence is an escalating pattern of violence by an intimate intimate partner where the violence is used to exercise power and control;
d) Psychological or Emotional abuse is the willful infliction of mental or emotional anguish by threat, humiliation, or other verbal or nonverbal conduct.
e) Financial abuse is the illegal or improper use of an older person's funds, property, or resources. This form of abuse involves a range of conduct that includes: withholding of ATM card; taking money or property; forging an older person's signature; getting an older person to sign a deed, will, or power of attorney through deception, coercion, or undue influence; or using an older person's name without permission, among others. Fraud is the use of deception, trickery, false pretense, or dishonest acts or statements for financial gain;
f) Neglect is the failure of a caregiver to fulfill his or her care giving responsibilities. Self-neglect is failure to provide for one's own essential needs.
a. "Active" neglect refers to behavior that is willful - that is, the caregiver intentionally withholds care or necessities. The neglect may be motivated by financial gain (e.g., the caregiver stands to inherit) or reflect interpersonal conflicts;
b. "Passive" neglect refers to situations in which the caregiver is unable to fulfill his or her care giving responsibilities as a result of illness, disability, stress, ignorance, lack of maturity, or lack of resources;
Section 54. Older persons considered at risk: Older persons who are at risk or vulnerable to abuse are the following:
a. those who are isolated;
b. those who lack social or emotional support;
c. those with physical or mental disabilities who depend on others for care;
d. women in the case of domestic and sexual abuse;
Section 55. Perpetrators: Perpetrators of older persons abuse may be family members, caregivers, medical attendants or acquaintances.
Section 56. Violations: Those found guilty of committing older persons abuse will be charged under applicable provisions of the Revised Penal Code, Republic Act No. 9257 as amended by Republic Act No. 9994, otherwise known

--- [Page 15] ---
Page 15 of 20
Ord. No. 0417-10

as the "Expanded Senior Citizens Act of 2010," "Anti-VAWC Law" (RA 9262), Anti-Rape Law (RA 8353) and other special laws.

Abuses that are not covered under any of these laws shall be penalized under Article XII of this Ordinance.

ARTICLE VIII
CREATION OF THE "OLDER PERSONS DESK" IN THE DAVAO CITY POLICE OFFICE

Section 57. Older Persons Desk: There shall be established an "Older Persons Desk" in all police precincts in Davao City in close coordination with the Public Attorney's Office (PAO) for prosecutorial services and with the City Social Services Development Office (CSSDO) for psycho-social services.

Section 58. Cases falling under the Older Persons Desk: The "Older Persons Desk" shall attend to complaints of older persons falling under the following, but not limited to:

a. Violations of Republic Act No. 9257, as amended by Republic Act No. 9994, otherwise known as the "Expanded Senior Citizens Act of 2010";

b. Commission of older persons abuses in the form of physical, sexual and psychological abuse; domestic violence; financial abuse; and neglect as defined under Article VII, Section 28 of this Ordinance;

c. Violations under the Revised Penal Code;

d. Violations under the "Anti-VAWC Law" (RA 9262) and Anti-Rape Law (RA 8353);

e. Other applicable special laws;

Section 59. The conduct of initial investigation and evidence gathering: The "Older Persons Desk" shall be responsible for conducting initial investigations and gathering of testimonial and documentary evidences supporting the complaints. It shall cause the filing of complaint in the City Prosecutor's Office, if warranted.

Section 60. Lawyers for older persons' concerns: The City, through the City Legal Office, shall assist in the handling of cases on older persons' abuse and of older persons' concerns in accordance with the procedure set forth by the Rules of Court and other special laws;

ARTICLE IX
SELF-PUPILLMENT

Section 61. Senior Citizens Center: Older persons shall be able to pursue opportunities for the full development of their potential. There shall be established a Senior Citizens Center or "Centers" in every district or barangay pursuant to Rules IV and V of RA 7876, otherwise known as the Senior Citizens Center Act.

--- [Page 16] ---
Page 16 of 20
Ord. No. 0417-10

Section 62. Strengthening the already established Senior Citizens Centers/As. The city shall strengthen the Senior Citizens Center/As (SCCAs) that have been established in Davao City. These centers shall be treated as extensions of the City Social Services Development Office.

Section 63. Functions of the Senior Citizens Centers/As. The Senior Citizens Centers (SCCAs) shall have the following functions:

(a) Identify the needs, trainings, and opportunities for senior citizens in the city;

(b) Initiate, develop, and implement productive activities and work schemes for senior citizens in order to provide income or otherwise supplement their earnings in the local community;

(c) Promote and maintain linkages with the city government and other government instrumentalities and the city and municipal councils for the elderly and the Federation of Senior Citizens Association of the Philippines and other non-government organizations for the delivery of health care services, facilities, professional advice services, volunteers' trainings and community self-help projects;

(d) To exercise such other functions which are necessary to carry out the purpose for which the centers are established;

Section 64. Office of Senior Citizen's Affairs (OSCA) representative in the Senior Citizens Center/As. The Office for Senior Citizen's Affairs (OSCA) may identify and recommend its representative who is a resident of the district where such Center is located. Such representative must be a member of a senior citizen's chapter. The representative shall participate in the activities under Section 38 of this Code;

Section 65. Educational tutorials and livelihood trainings. The Senior Citizens Centers shall also establish a program providing educational tutorials for illiterate older persons and livelihood trainings for older persons who would still want to seek employment or possible livelihood sources;

Section 66. Older persons library and reading section. The city shall set up a library and reading section at the Senior Citizens Centers preferably equipped with computer units and reading materials;

Section 67. Continuing Education. Schools and educational institutions must not deny the desire of older persons to continue their formal education from elementary, high school, college and post-graduate studies. The City must come up with programs to support this desire of older persons for continuing education;

Section 68. Promotion of arts. The City, through the Office for Senior Citizens Affairs, shall promote, assist and provide venues for arts, theatre and other forms of self-expression of older persons to encourage their creativity, passion and freedom of expression;

Section 69. Institutionalization of the Elderlympics. The city shall actively promote sports activities for Older Persons through the regular conduct of "Elderlympics" every first week of December.

Section 70. Older Persons Day. An "Older Persons Day" in Davao City shall be observed on October 1 of each year;

--- [Page 17] ---
Page 17 of 20
Ord. No. 0417-10

Section 71. Senior Citizens Week: The "Senior Citizen Week" shall be celebrated from October 1 to 7 every year;

Section 72. Formulation and implementation of activities during the Senior Citizens Week Celebration: The Older Persons Association, in partnership with the City Social Services and Development Office and other agencies, both government or private and non-government organizations, shall formulate and implement activities in line with the Senior Citizens Week Celebration;

ARTICLE X
INFORMATION, EDUCATION AND AWARENESS CAMPAIGN

Section 73. Information and education at the barangay level: Information and education sessions must be provided to Older Persons at the barangay level to raise their awareness and educate them on their rights and privileges under existing laws;

Section 74. Older persons pamphlets: Pamphlets containing the existing laws for Older Persons and this Code shall be disseminated among Older Persons and those working for and with them;

Section 75. Educational Programs: The City shall urge and encourage primary and secondary schools including colleges and state universities to integrate the roles, rights, and issues concerning older persons in the curricula with a view of promoting respect, awareness, and understanding towards older persons. For this purpose, the City shall ask the support and assistance of the Department of Education (DEP-ED) and the Commission on Higher Education (CHED);

Section 76. Posters, stickers, and notices to generate public awareness: The City government through the City Mayor shall require all establishments to prominently display posters, stickers and other notices that will generate public awareness of the rights, privileges, and welfare of older persons. The City government shall ensure that the provisions of laws pertaining to older persons and this Code are implemented to its fullest;

Section 77. Advocacy Campaign: The government with the assistance of private institutions, non-governmental organizations and media practitioners shall promote and disseminate information regarding the rights, privileges and welfare of older persons under existing laws through an advocacy campaign program;

ARTICLE XI
PRIVILEGES AND INCENTIVES

Section 78. Privileges for the older persons: The older persons shall be entitled to the benefits enumerated under Republic Act No. 9257 as amended by Republic Act No. 9994, otherwise known as the "Expanded Senior Citizens Act of 2010";

Section 79. Evidence required to avail the privileges mentioned in Section 77: To avail the privileges mentioned in Section 77, the older person may submit as proof of his/her entitlement thereto any of the following:

--- [Page 18] ---
Page 18 of 20
Ord. No. 0417-10

a. An ID issued by the city or municipal mayor or of the barangay captain of the place where the senior citizen or the elderly resides;

b. The passport of the elderly person or senior citizen concerned;

c. Other documents that establish that the senior citizen, elderly person or older person is a citizen of the Republic and is at least sixty (60) years of age;

Section 80. Incentives for establishments granting privileges
Establishments granting privileges under Section 77 may claim the discounts granted under Republic Act No. 9257 as authorized by Republic Act No. 9994 as tax deduction based on the net cost of the goods sold or services rendered. Provided that the cost of the discount shall be allowed as deduction from the gross income for the same taxable year that the discount is granted. Provided, further, that the total amount of the claimed tax deduction net of value added tax if applicable, shall be included in their gross sales receipts for tax purposes and shall be subject to proper documentation and to the provisions of the National Internal Revenue Code, as amended.

The City shall give additional incentives, through tax credits or other similar forms, to these private entities granting privileges under Section 77;

Section 81. Tax incentives on entities employing older persons
Tax incentives shall be granted to private entities employing older persons as employees and investors;

Private entities shall be entitled to an additional deduction from their gross income, equivalent to fifteen percent (15%) of the total amount paid as salaries and wages to older persons pursuant to the implementing guidelines of RA 9272 and further subject to the provision of Section 34 of the National Internal Revenue Code, as amended and the Revenue Regulations to be issued by the Bureau of Internal Revenue approved by the Department of Finance;

Furthermore, the City shall give additional incentives, through tax credits or other similar forms, to these private entities employing older persons;

Section 82. Tax incentives for individuals with older persons as dependents
Older person shall be treated as dependents as provided for under the National Internal Revenue Code and as such, individual taxpayers caring for them, be they relatives or not, shall be accorded the privileges granted by the Code insofar as having dependents are concerned;

Section 83. Incentives on private individuals putting up older persons' homes or havens
Individuals or non-governmental institutions establishing homes, residential communities or retirement villages solely for senior citizens shall be accorded the following:

a) Realty tax holiday for the first five (5) years starting from the first year of operations;

b) After five (5) years, realty tax payment discount of fifty percent (50%);

c) Priority in the building and/or maintenance of provincial or municipal roads leading to the aforementioned home, residential community or retirement village;

--- [Page 19] ---
Page 19 of 20
Ord. No. 0417-10

In this regard, older persons' homes or havens shall be under the proper monitoring, accreditation, and licensing by the Department of Social Welfare and Development (DSWD) in coordination with the City through the City Social Services and Development Office (CSDSO) and the City Health Office (CHO) especially in the hiring of staffs for the said social services institutions.

Section 84. Incentives to institutions and companies conducting regular social welfare programs. The City shall extend some of the incentives and benefits it may grant under the law to institutions and companies conducting regular social welfare programs with the end of encouraging more entities to contribute in the development of the well-being of older persons in Davao City.

Section 85. Incentives to private individuals, companies, and institutions granting entertainment and amusement benefits to older persons. The City shall provide additional incentives and benefits to private individuals, companies, and institutions granting entertainment and amusement benefits to older persons to encourage private sector participation in the grant of privileges to older persons of Davao City.

Section 86. Promotion of privileges and incentives. The City, through the Office for Senior Citizens Affairs, shall promote and encourage the grant of privileges and incentives provided under this Code with the end in view that older persons will enjoy to the fullest all the privileges granted by law;

ARTICLE XII
PENALTIES

Section 87. Penalties for violation of this Code not covered under any national law. Violators of this Code shall be subject to a fine of not less than P 500.00 nor more than P 5,000.00 or imprisonment of not less than one (1) month nor more than one (1) year or both, at the discretion of the court.

Section 88. Suspension or cancellation of business permits. In addition to the penalties provided forth by national laws and this Code, the City may suspend or cancel the business permits issued to establishments violating said national laws and this Code.

ARTICLE XIII
APPROPRIATION

Section 89. Appropriation. The City shall set aside not less than one percent (1%) of its total budget appropriation. All barangays shall also set aside not less than one percent (1%) of their total appropriation for programs related to older persons.

An amount of not less than Five Million Pesos (P 5,000,000.00) shall be set aside for the implementation of this Ordinance, chargeable against any available fund.

ARTICLE XIV
FINAL PROVISION

Section 90. Implementing Rules and Regulations. The City Mayor, through an Executive Order, shall create and constitute a joint Executive-

--- [Page 20] ---
Page 20 of 20
Ord. No. 0417-10

Legislative Committee to formulate the Implementing Rules and Regulations necessary to carry out the provisions of this Code. Such rules and regulations shall take effect immediately after publication in a local newspaper of general circulation in the City of Davao;

Section 91. Severability Clause. If for any reason, any section or provision of this Ordinance is declared unconstitutional or invalid, the other sections or provisions hereof which are not affected thereby shall continue to be in full force and effect.

Section 92. Repealing Clause. All Ordinances, local issuances or rules inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 93. Effectivity Clause. This Ordinance shall take effect fifteen (15) days following its posting and publication in a local newspaper of general circulation in the City of Davao.

ENACTED, April 27, 2010, by a majority vote of all the Members of the Sangguniang Panlungsod present.

CERTIFIED CORRECT:

ZULEIKA T. LOPEZ
Secretary to the Sangguniang Panlungsod
(City Government/Department Head II)

ATTESTED:

SARA Z. DUERTE
Vice Mayor
Presiding Officer
cmn/mikc

APPROVED: JUL 08 (vii) 2010

RODRIGO R. DUERTE
Acting City Mayor

ATTESTED: