=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 0785-19 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
Republic of the Philippines
Office of the Sangguniang Panlungsod
City of Davao

18th City Council
21st Regular Session
Series of 2019

PRESENT:
Councillor Ma. Cherry Ann M. Bonguyan
- Temporary Presiding Officer
Councillor Nilo M. Abellera Jr.
Councillor Maria Belen D. Castilla
Councillor Victoria L. Advincula Jr.
Councillor Al Ryan S. Alejandre
Councillor Dante L. Apostol Sr.
Councillor Conrad C. Baluran
Councillor Joanne M. Bonguyan-Quilos
Councillor Pilar C. Braga
Councillor Danilo C. Dayanghiring
Councillor April Nicole C. Dayap
Councillor Edgard P. Dela Cruz Jr.
Councillor Edgar R. Ibuayan Sr.
Councillor Leah A. Librado-Yap
Councillor Rene Elias C. Lopez
Councillor Diosdado Angelo A. Mahipus
Councillor Bonifacio E. Militar
Councillor Avegayle Datoz Ortiz
Councillor Antonio G. Fajardo-Picoe-Castrodes
Councillor J. Melchor B. Quitain Jr.
Councillor Hallia Y. Sudagar
Councillor Mary Joselle D. Villafuerte
Councillor Jesus Joseph P. Zozobraado III

ABSENT:
Vice Mayor Bernard E. Al-ag
Councillor Carmelo J. Clarion
Councillor Jimmy G. Dureza
Councillor Jaffar A. Marohomsalic
Councillor Marissa P. Salvador-Abella

ORDINANCE NO. 0785-19
Series of 2019

AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ARTICLE IV, SECTION 2, ARTICLE VI, SECTION 6 AND ARTICLE XII, SECTION 2 OF ORDINANCE NO. 0546-13, SERIES OF 2013, OR THE COMPREHENSIVE ZONING ORDINANCE OF DAVAO CITY TO DELINEATE AREAS FOR ECO-TOURISM AND AGRO-
TOURISM ACTIVITIES IN MARILOG AND PAQUIBATO DISTRICTS, THIS CITY

--- [Page 2] ---
Page 2 of 7
Ord. No. 0785-19

Be it ordained by the Honorable Sangguniang Panlungsod of Davao City in session
assembled, that:

SECTION 1. TITLE - This Ordinance shall be known as "AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ARTICLE IV, SECTION 2, ARTICLE VI, SECTION 1 AND ARTICLE XII, SECTION 2 OF ORDINANCE NO. 0546-13, SERIES OF 2013 OR THE COMPREHENSIVE ZONING ORDINANCE OF DAVAO CITY TO DELINEATE AREAS FOR ECO-TOURISM AND AGRO-TOURISM ACTIVITIES IN MARILOG AND PAQBATO DISTRICTS, THIS CITY".

SECTION 2. AMENDMENT - Article IV, Section 2, Article VI, Section 1, and Article XII, Section 2 of Ordinance No. 0546-13, Series of 2013, is hereby amended as follows:

Article IV.
SECTION 2: CONSERVATION ZONE (CZ1 AND CZ2)

2.1. Definition: There shall be two Conservation Zones namely Conservation Zone 1 (CZ1) and Conservation Zone 2 (CZ2), consisting a total area of 62,469 hectares identified and declared as Environmentally Critical Areas (ECA) in the Watershed Code of Davao City and areas declared as laws as national parks, watershed reserves, wildlife preserves and sanctuaries including recharge areas for water requirement where rainwater or seepage actually enters the aquifers.

For delineation purposes, Conservation Zone 1 (CZ1) with a total area of 37,102 hectares will cover areas declared and/or determined as national parks, watershed reserves, wildlife preserves and sanctuaries, government owned closed canopy reserves. Conservation Zone 2 (CZ2), with a total area of 25,287 hectares, consists of areas within Districts II and III which are by definition of existing national environmental laws, should be classified as a conservation area but not within the watershed reserves and recharge areas of the city. (CZ1 and CZ2 delineation in Fig. 2.5)

2.2. The following are the allowable uses and activities in Conservation Zone:

2.2.1. Allowable uses in Conservation Zone 1 shall include:
(a) Development and maintenance of Mt. Apo National Park,
(b) Preservation of existing cultural settlements,
(c) Improvement and maintenance of all waterway easements,
(d) Reforestation development projects,
(e) Preservation of biodiversity areas;

and
2.2.2. Allowable uses in Conservation Zone 2 shall include uses b, c, d, and e in CZ1 plus
(a) Limited Eco-Tourism Activities which shall have the following conditions:
1. FPIC and/or Tenurial Agreement with CADT owners and DENR whenever applicable;
2. DENR and LGU permits and licenses and other necessary documents must be complied with prior to construction and operation;
3. Maximum of 2% concrete construction footprint measured by the cumulative total of ground floor areas covered by concrete as against the total area under tenurial agreement wherein structures should be no higher than 6 meters from the ground;
4. No clearing of trees nor slope alteration will be undertaken.

--- [Page 3] ---
Page 3 of 7
Ord. No. 0785-19
(h) Development and/or improvement of Ecological and Non-
commercial cultural settlements using indigenous materials. Trees that may be used in the construction of cultural settlements shall come from the farms or industrial tree plantations or other sources as may be allowed by the DENR. Watershed Management Council, DRRMO, and MGB shall be cleared by DENR, Watershed Management Council, DRRMO, and MGB among all agencies concerned for safety and sustainability.
In no case shall construction development in 2.2a and 2.2b be located in areas that are medium to high susceptible to landslides and in areas generally assessed as unsuitable for construction development by the CDRRMo.
2.3. The following are the compatible uses/activities in Conservation Zone:
2.3.1. The right to the uses of the resources in Conservation Zone which are given to the other direct stakeholders by the agencies of the government must be accompanied with corresponding responsibilities and accountabilities. Consequently, tenurial agreement granted by DENR to any corporation, firm, association, or any juridical or natural person covering areas in the Forest Zone shall be respected provided that:
2.3.1.1. The Davao City Government shall recommend to the DENR the revocation of such tenurial agreements if found in a review to be conducted for the purpose of the implementation of this Ordinance to have violated conditions for the grant of such agreement;
2.3.1.2. No new application by any juridical or natural person for any form of tenurial agreement shall be approved without the recommendation of the Davao City Government;
2.3.1.3. The Davao City Government and DENR shall enter into a co-
management agreement in the protection, conservation and management of the watershed areas not covered by any tenurial agreement.
2.3.2. The rights over ancestral domain of the indigenous peoples as enshrined in the Indigenous Peoples' Rights Act (IPRA) of 1997 or RA 8371 shall be respected. This Ordinance strongly supports the protection of the rights of the indigenous peoples to their ancestral domains to ensure their economic, social and cultural well-being; and the recognition of customary laws governing property rights in determining the ownership and extent of ancestral domains provided that:
2.3.2.1. Any lease granted to any juridical and natural person by the Indigenous Tribal Council over any portion of the Ancestral Domain in Conservation Zone shall be in consultation with the Watershed Management Council;
2.3.2.2. No such lease shall be granted in any part of the Conservation Areas, except to juridical and natural persons engaging in reforestation projects and other activities on the protection and conservation of the watershed areas;
2.3.2.3. No such lease in any part of the Conservation Areas shall be granted to any entity engaged in monocrop agriculture.

--- [Page 4] ---
2.4. The following acts are prohibited in Conservation Zone:

2.4.1. Any change from Conservation Zone to another General Zone

2.4.2. Commercial tree farming except those related to reforestation and those covered with tenurial instruments with DENR;

2.4.3. Water drilling except for household use;

2.4.4. Hunting, destroying, disturbing or mere possession of any plant or animal or products derived therefrom without permit from the Watershed Management Council;

2.4.5. Dumping or disposing of any waste products detrimental to plants and animals and inhabitants thereof;

2.4.6. Use of motorized equipment without permit from the Watershed Management Council;

2.4.7. Mutilating, defacing, destroying objects of natural beauty, burial grounds, religious sites, artifacts or other objects belonging to cultural communities;

2.4.8. Damaging or destroying roads and trails;

2.4.9. Squatting, mineral exploration or illegal occupation;

2.4.10. Conducting any construction, mining, or structure, fence or enclosure and conducting any business enterprise unless duly allowed and permitted under the Limited Eco-Tourism Activities within C22 in Article IV Section 2;

2.4.11. Altering, removing, destroying or defacing boundary marks or signs;

2.4.12. Exploitation of quarry resources and commercial sand and gravel resources.

2.5. Requirements for introduction of any development: Introduction of any development in the area must have a favorable endorsement from the Watershed Management Council in accordance with the Watershed Code of Davao City.

2.6. Restoration and/or Reforestation Program for Existing Non-Conforming Tourism-related establishments within Conservation Zones:

2.6.1. For Existing Non-Conforming Establishments within C21 - A Demolition Order of structures shall be issued once officially ascertained that structures or land development have been introduced within C21. Aside from all the applicable charges and penalties that may be imposed against the violators, a reforestation program within the disturbed site shall be required to be undertaken by the violator.

2.6.2. For Existing Non-conforming Establishments within C22 - A restoration program shall become a requisite for a 3-year Conditional Mayor's Permit wherein the applicant for building and business permits shall restore and/or reforest previously utilized areas in excess of the 2% concrete structure footprint limitation wherein the reforestation program can be undertaken within the area subject of the tenurial agreement and if found to be insufficient, the required reforestation program shall extend to areas that may be recommended by DENR or CENRO. If restoration and reforestation program is proven unsuccessful in the 3-year conditional period, as per joint assessment by DENR and CENRO, the mayor's permit shall be revoked.

Additionally, existing non-conforming establishments within CZ2 which have been subjected to the reforestation program as per guidance by WRMCC and CENRO and as part of the compliance process of securing permits shall in no way be allowed to expand concrete structures within the area.

--- [Page 5] ---
Page 5 of 7  
Ord. No. 0785-19  

Further, for those non-conforming structures which were constructed in areas deemed prone to risk such as landslides among others, a demolition order shall be issued by the City Engineer's Office immediately upon recommendation by the CDRRM.  

2.7 GEO-TAGGING and Inventory of Trees in the Conservation Zone - CENRO and the Department of Environment and Natural Resources Office are directed to conduct a regular Tree-Tagging activity in the entire zone to ensure that the number of trees in the area shall be properly accounted for. Each tree in the conservation zone shall be exclusively marked and geo-tagged for tracking and inventory purposes. This activity shall exclude trees from industrial and commercial tree farms.  

ARTICLE VI  
AGRICULTURAL LAND SUB-ZONES  

SECTION 1. AGRI-NON TILLAGE SUB-ZONE  

1.2. Definition: Those areas consisting of 12,240 identified and declared as Environmentally Critical Areas (ECA) in the Watershed Code of Davao City, (Fig. 2.14)  

1.3. The following are the Allowable Uses/Activities in Agri-non Tillage Sub-zone:  
1.3.1. Agro Forest Management  
1.3.2 Ecological Revolution Program  
1.3.3 Watershed management and related activities to be undertaken by the government or private sector without the cooperation with Non-Government Organizations (NGOs) and People's Organizations (POs).  
1.3.4 Agro-tourism Activities provided that the area is at least 70% devoted for agricultural production.  

1.4. The following are the Compatible Uses/Activities in Agri-non Tillage Sub-zone:  
Uses/activities allowed in Forest Zone.  

1.5. The following acts are prohibited in Agri-non Tillage Sub-zone:  
1.5.1. Any change from Agri-non Tillage Sub-zone to another general zone or sub-zone.  

1.5.2 Agri-business and other industrial undertaking without Environmental Compliance Certificate (ECC) as provided in Presidential Decree No. 1586 establishing the Environmental Impact Statement and Proclamation No. 2146;  
1.5.3 Water drilling for industrial use except those issued with an ECC pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 1586 and Proclamation No. 2146 and the Davao City Water Resource Management Ordinance;  
1.5.4 Construction of any vertical structures for commercial, industrial, institutional, religious purposes without ECC except for research and scientific studies, educational purposes and community chapels, churches and mosques;  
1.5.5 Exploitation of quarry resources and commercial sand and sand gravel resources;

--- [Page 6] ---
Page 6 of 7  
Ord. No. 0785-19  
1.5.6 Monocrop agriculture activities including, but not limited to, banana and pineapple plantations, provided that:  
1.5.6.1 A Phase-Out Plan shall be granted to existing large scale monocrop agriculture in accordance with the watershed code;  
1.5.6.2 No permit shall be issued to new applications for monocrop agricultural ventures;  
1.5.6.3 Existing monocrop agriculture covered by the Phase-Out Plan shall not be allowed to expand upon effectiveness of the Watershed Code;  
1.5.7 Aerial spray application of all kinds of farm production inputs and crop agents;  
1.5.8 Use of any kind of inorganic fertilizer, pesticide, herbicide and other farm production inputs and crop protection agents;  
ARTICLE XII  
INNOVATIVE MODES OF DEVELOPMENT  
SECTION 2. EXISTING NON-ConFORMING USES AND BUILDING.  
The lawful uses of any building, structure or land at the time of adoption or amendment of this Ordinance may still be allowed to continue, although such uses do not conform with the provision of this Ordinance, excluding those zones under Conservation Zone 1 (CZ 1) and Conservation Zone 2 (CZ 2), provided.  
XXXX  
XXXX  
XXXX  
SECTION 3. SEPARABILITY CLAUSE. If, for any reason, any section or provision of this Ordinance is declared unconstitutional or invalid, other sections or provisions hereof not affected by such declaration shall continue to be in full force and effect.  
SECTION 4. EFFECTIVITY. This Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon approval.  
ENACTED, on the 4th day of June, 2019 by a unanimous vote of all the Members of the Sangguniang Panlungsod, there being a quorum.  
CERTIFIED CORRECT:  
CHARITO N. SANTOS  
Secretary to the Sangguniang Panlungsod  
(City Government Department Head II)

--- [Page 7] ---
Page 7 of 7
Ord. No. 0785-19

ATTESTED:
MA. CHERRY ANN M. BONGUYAN
Acting (Vice) Mayor
Temporary Presiding Officer
cns/fktq

APPROVED: 18 JUL 2019

ATTESTED:
ATTY. ZULEIKA T. LOPEZ
City Administrator