=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 0363-82 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
**Document**

**1962.03.07. Session Series of 1962**

Republic of the Philippines

LUBANG NG DILAW

Tingnan ang Sanjuunyang rapanungad

=0000-

MAYOR R. M. RODRIGUEZ, CHAIRMAN OF THE HONORABLE COUNCIL OF THE LUBANG NG DILAW, CITY OF MANILA, HEARD ON WEDNESDAY, NOVEMBER 11, 1962.

**Present:**

Vice-Mayor Cornelius P. Asuncion, presiding officer;

Councilors Valentinus G. Relaye, Jr., Julianus O. Valenciano, Alexius C. Alhendras, Alfredo N. Vergara, Santiago S. Dela Cruz, Villafuerte, Jr., Antonio O. Ustilago, Buesnaga A., Aquilipas and Robert Allan Almazo.

**ASSUMPTION No. 5/4**

Proposed Expenditure Amending Ordinance of Davao City, as recom-
mended by the Committee on Planning and Development, was approved by the Mayor Cornelius P. Asuncion and for approval, was presented by Councilor Valentinus V. Relaye, Jr., Chairman of the Committee on Planning and Development for consideration and appropriate action of the body.

Councilor Valentinus V. Relaye, Jr., informed the body that the Committee on Planning and Development had conducted two public sessions to generate necessary participation and involvement from the various segments of the City's constituency toward the public welfare and development of the City, respectively. In order to hear their views and opinions on the matter, the body decided to conduct a session. Through discussions took place, oftentimes resulted that led to the Committee's final recommendation on the matter.

The President of the Davao City Chamber of Commerce, Atty. Martin T. Susita and the representative of the Metro District of Negros, Representative Jose A. Jiron, representing the Metropolitan District of Negros, and the President of the Legislative Assembly and Chairman of the Davao Bench of Selectors, were present during the previous session and manifested their desire for the early approval of the Expenditure Comprehensive Development Plan of the City as it relates to its land uses and development.

Councilor Relaye, Jr., narrated the rationale, intents and necessity of the Expenditure Comprehensive Development Plan of the City as to its land uses and development.

Councilor Jiron A. Jiron proposed to amend by deleting the given language in the ordinance, the stand against the amendment, representing the 50 meter easement on both sides of the highway, from Rajah to Bancajo as the national government has already established a 14 meter easement on both sides of said road for national highways purposes, and that the easement of the 50 meters would be detrimental to the lands and properties affected therein would maximize the use of their properties for economic purposes. The project accepted the amendment.

Continued on page 2-2

--- [Page 2] ---
**Page 2**

**Resolution No. 674; Ordinance No. 351; Series of 1980; Cont'd.**

After careful deliberation, on motion of Councilor Justine V. Foley, Jr., duly seconded by Councilors Jose A. Jiron, Jehu (Jho) S. Banque, Amilcar J. Castillo, as assented by Councilor Jose A. Jiron, co-sponsored by Councilors Jose A. Jiron and Tomas Monteverde, Jr., it was

**RESOLVED, AS IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED, to approve the amended Comprehensive Zoning Plan for Davao City, as prepared by the Davao City Planning and Development Board.**

**RESOLVED, likewise, to approve the Comprehensive Development Plan for Davao City for the year 1980-2000.**

**ORDINANCE NO. 351**

AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING A COMPREHENSIVE ZONING REGULATIONS FOR THE CITY OF DAVAO AND PROVIDING FOR THE ADMINISTRATION, IMPLEMENTATION AND AMENDMENT THEREOF AND FOR THE ELECTION OF AN ORDINANCE ENACTING THE FOLLOWING:

WHEREAS, the national government has sponsored and now assists in and coordinates the activities of national and regional agencies and local governments in making settlement planning for major urban and urbanizing centers;

WHEREAS, for this purpose, the government has conceived and operationalized the Tagaytay Pilipino Program as an agent, Philippine programs which envisage self-help and community development that would contribute meaningfully to a unified and progressive national community;

WHEREAS, the Tagaytay Pilipino Program is concerned with assisting in and expediting the preparation of town plans which shall be used to assure implementation of the country's development projects;

WHEREAS, the implementation of the Davao City Comprehensive Development Plan would require the enactment of regulatory measures to translate its planning goals and objectives into reality;

WHEREAS, a zoning ordinance is one such regulatory measure which is an important tool for the implementation of the above plan;

NOW, THEREFORE, The Sangguniang Panlungsod of Davao City, in session assembled hereby adopts the following zoning ordinance.

ARTICLE I

**APPLICABILITY AND APPLICABLE**

Section 1.- APPLICABILITY - This ordinance is enacted pursuant to Sections 3(j) of Republic Act No. Twenty two hundred and Sixty-one (261), otherwise known as the Local Agency Act, authorizing cities to enact ordinances subject to the approval of the City Mayor and pursuant to Memorandum Circular No. 420 of the Department of the Interior and Local Government, and further providing that the Local Legislative Bodies create and execute their respective City Planning and Development Boards; and pursuant thereto to the provisions of Presidential Decree No. 953, which provides that the City Planning and Development Board shall be composed of the Mayor, the Vice-Mayor, the City Engineer, the City Planner, the City Architect, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the City Engineer, the

--- [Page 3] ---
Page 1

Resolution No. 874; Ordinance No. 362;
series of 1982, continued.

Section 2: - NURPOLS - This Ordinance is enacted for the following purposes:

1. Guide, control, and regulate future growth and development of Bayano City in accordance with its Comprehensive Development Plan;

2. Reflect the character and stability of conservation, agricultural, urban, urbanizing, residential, commercial, industrial, and open spaces within the locality, and promote orderly and beneficial development of the same;

3. Prevent and protect the health, peace, comfort, convenience, and general welfare of the inhabitants in the locality;

4. Provide adequate light, air, privacy, and convenience of access to property;

5. Prevent undue concentration of activities which collectively may cause undue harm to the population;

6. Regulate the location and use of buildings and lands in such manner as to obviate the danger to public safety caused by undue interference with existing or prospective traffic movements on such streets and thoroughfares.

Article II

DEFINITIONS

When used in this Ordinance, the words, terms, and phrases enumerated hereunder shall be understood to have the meaning respectively indicated as follows:

1. Accessory/Incidental Uses: A use incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the building and/or land;

2. Alteration: The gradual and imperceptible accumulation of uses on existing property by natural causes in the case of lands located along rivers, lakes, or other waters;

3. Additions, alterations, repairs: Changes in an existing building involving interior or exterior work and/or increase or decrease in its area;

4. Alley: Any public space or thoroughfare which has been designated to the public or public use as a passageway with a width of not more than 7.00 meters.

--- [Page 4] ---
Page 41
Resolution No. 574; Ordinance No. 367;
series of 1929, cont'd.
5. Apartment: Any building or edifice containing several,
independent and furnished or semi-furnished apartment,
regularly leased to tourists and other travelers for
dwelling on a more or less long term basis and offering
basic services to its tenants, similar to hotels.
6. Apartment: A room or suite of two or more rooms,
designed and intended for or occupied by one family
for living, sleeping, and cooking purposes.
7. Lodging House: A house with several sleeping rooms
where boarders are provided with lodging and means for
a third and paid by the host or tenant.
8. Botanical Garden: A tract of land used for the culture
and study of plants, collected and grown for scientific
and display purposes.
9. Building: A constructed edifice designed to stand mere
or less permanently, covering a space of land, usually
covered by a roof, mere or less enclosed by walls and
supported by columns, and serving as a dwelling, factory,
shelter for animals, etc.
10. Building Area: The remaining space in a lot after
deducting the required minimum space.
11. Building Accessory: A building subordinate to the
main building located on the same lot; the use of which is necessary any incidental to the use and enjoyment
of the main building. Examples: servant's quarters,
garage, etc.
12. Building Usage: The principal structure wherein the
use of the land on which it is situated is conducted.
13. Building Industry: any establishment or firm which can-
forms to the standards set forth by the National Cottage
Industry Development Authority (NACDA).
14. Dormitory: A building where persons are provided with
board and lodging facilities in common halls, for a
compensation.
15. Dwelling: Any building or any portion thereof intended
or designated to be built, used, rented, leased, let or
hired out to be occupied, or which are occupied for
living or residential purposes.
16. Dwelling: One-Family Detached: a one-family house having
one party wall and two side yards.
17. Dwelling: One-Family, Semi-Detached: a one family dwelling
as above defined except that it is provided with one side
yard.
Continued on Page 42

--- [Page 5] ---
Resolution No. 734, dated June 25, 1965, series of 1960, cont'd:

18. Dwelling: Two-Family-Detached: A house or structure divided into two separate and independent living quarters by a wall extending from the floor to the ceiling and with two yards, each yard provided complete with facilities for one household.

19. Dwelling: Two-Family-Single-Unit: A two-family dwelling as defined above except that it is provided with one side yard.

20. Dwelling: Multi-Family: A building used as a home or residence of three (3) or more families living independently from one another, each occupying one or more rooms as a single housekeeping unit.

21. Segment: An encumbrance imposed on an immovable (see New Civil Code of the Philippines) for the benefit of another, immovable belonging to a different owner.

22. Family: A group of individuals related by blood, living under one roof and considered as part of a single housekeeping unit.

23. Filling Station: A retail station serving automobiles and other motor vehicles with gasoline and oil only.

24. Foreman: The strip of land that lies between the high and low water marks and that is alternately wet and dry according to the flow of the tide.

25. Garage: A building or portion thereof in which motor vehicles (1/2) are stored, repaired, or kept.

26. Garage, Commercial: A garage where automobiles and other motor vehicles are housed, maintained, equipped, re-arranged or kept for remanufacturing, hire or sale.

27. Garage, Private: A building or a portion of a building in which only motor vehicles used by the tenants of the building or by inhabitants on the premises are stored or kept.

28. Guard House: An accessory building or structure used by a security guard while on duty.

29. Home Business: An occupation or business conducted with the dwelling unit.

30. Hospital: An institution providing health service, primarily for in-patient, and medical or physical care of patients and inmates including an integral part thereof, such related services as are necessary for outpatient department, training facilities, and staff offices.

31. Jail: A building or a part thereof with rooms occupied or intended to be occupied for hire as temporary housing. It is usually, but not necessarily, with a general kitchen and public dining room, and equipped with provision for cooking in any individual, suit or room.

--- [Page 6] ---
**Rags - 1**

**Paragraph 2:**
Left: A parcel of land or which a principal building and its accessories is placed together with the required open space.

**Paragraph 3:**
Left: Part of the average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.

**Paragraph 4:**
Manufacturing industry: An industry which involves the manufacture or mechanical transformation of tangible pre- quents whether it is done in factory or in the worker's house.

**Paragraph 5:**
Any structure with several separate units with sufficient parking space primarily located along the highway or close to a highway where motorists may obtain lodging and in some instances meals.

**Paragraph 6:**
Museum: A non-profit, non-commercial establishment operated as a repository, or a collection of natural, man-made, or historical objects, and which presents such as works of art. This does not include the regular sale or distribution of the objects exhibited.

**Paragraph 7:**
Nursery Day Care Center: A place where children are ten, clearly cared for the trained in the parent's absence.

**Paragraph 8:**
Open Storage: A designated area for storing bulk of any particular stock without any roof and exposed to the elements.

**Paragraph 9:**
Parks: A pleasure ground set apart for recreation of the public to promote its health and enjoyment.

**Paragraph 10:**
Parking Building: A building of several floors used for temporary parking of motor vehicles which may be provided with services allowed for service stations.

**Paragraph 11:**
Parking Lot: An off-street open area, principally used for parking motor vehicles whether for compensation or not, by the public clients or customers.

**Paragraph 12:**
Private Pet House: A building or structure for keeping domestic pets, for the enjoyment as well as protection of the resident family members.

**Paragraph 13:**
Professional Office: The office of a person engaged in any occupation other than mining, not rural, commercial, seminarian, or agricultural, in which a professional knowledge or skill in some department of science or learning, is used to serve the interest or welfare of others by its practical application.

**Paragraph 14:**
Public Terminal: A main station or designated place where public utility buses/vehicles shall only load or unload passengers and/or goods.

**Paragraph 15:**
Reclamation: Land reclaimed from the sea and other bodies of water.

--- [Page 7] ---
Page -7-
Resolution No. 394, Ordinance No. 361,
series of 1982, cont'd:
46. Recreational Centers: A place, compound or building or a portion thereof, open to the public for recreational and entertainment purposes.
47. Residential Condominium: A building containing at least five or more apartment units with common areas and facilities, each apartment owner having exclusive ownership and possession of his apartment.
48. Servant's quarters: A room within the dwelling, or in an accessory building where servants, maids, or helpers of the family are housed.
49. Service Station: A building and its premises where gasoline, oil, batteries, tires and car accessories may be supplied and dispensed at retail and where, in addition, the following services may be rendered among others:
49.1 Sale and servicing of minor motor components and accessories such as spark plugs, batteries and distributor;
49.2 Tire servicing and repair, but not recapping or re-grooving;
49.3 Radiator cleansing, and flushing;
49.4 Washing, and polishing, and sale of automotive washing and polishing materials, grease, and lubrication;
49.5 Sales of soft drinks, passenger foods, tobacco and similar convenient goods for service station customers as accessory and incidental to the principal operations;
49.6 Provisions of read stage and other informational materials to customers provisions of rest room facilities.
Major, mechanical and body work, strengthening of body parts, painting, welding, storage or submittables which are not in operating conditions, or other works involving noises, glare, fumes, smoke or other characteristics to any extent greater than normally found in service stations are not permitted at a service station.
50. Shipping Center: A group of (not fewer than 10) contiguous buildings, originally planned and developed as a single unit, with insulate adaptability, off street parking facilities.
51. Airport: A building or structure devoted exclusively to the retail sale of a commodity or commodities.
52. Factory: A structure used for domestic, operative, action picture and other performances for admission to which entrance fee or money is received but no audience participation and meal service are allowed.
53. Restaurant Inn or Pension House: Any building or structure regularly catering to tourists and travelers, containing sleeping accommodations and dining rooms such as toilets, bathrooms, living and dining rooms and kitchen, and where a combination of board and lodging may be provided.

--- [Page 8] ---
**Page 2**

**Resolution No. 8**, Ordinance No. 365, series of 1982, cont'd.

**Article III**

**ZONING DISTRICTS**

**Section 1. - DESIGNATION:** To effectively carry out the provisions of this Ordinance, the City is hereby divided into conservation, agricultural, urban/urbanizing, residential, commercial, industrial, institutional, open-space, and special use districts.

1. Residential areas are further divided and classified into low-density and high-density or A-1, and A-2 districts, respectively.
2. Commercial areas are further divided and classified into highly commercial-industrial or C-1 and C-2 districts, respectively.
3. Industrial areas are divided and classified into industrial and productive or L-1 and L-2 districts, respectively.

**Section 2. - ZONING MAP:** There is hereby adopted as an integral part of this Ordinance two Official Zoning Maps, namely:

The Detailed Official Zoning Map and the Comprehensive Official Zoning Map, wherein the designations, location and boundaries of the designated zoning districts within established are shown and indicated by appropriate legend.

The Official Zoning Maps shall be identified by the signature of the City Mayor attested to by the Zoning Administrator and bearing the seal of the City of **[City Name]** under the following words: "This is to certify that this is official zoning map referred to in Ordinance No. [Ordinance Number], series of 1982."

Changes shall be entered on the Official Zoning Maps promptly after they have been passed by the Zoning Administrator and approved by the City Council with an entry on the Official Zoning Maps as follows: "Changes made under Ordinance No. [Ordinance Number]." Series of changes are the following changes were made in the Official Zoning Maps (series of legibility of Ordinance No. [Ordinance Number]), which entry shall be signed by the Zoning Administrator. Approved amendments to this Ordinance shall be indicated on the Official Zoning Maps by the Zoning Administrator within a week from receipt thereof.

--- [Page 9] ---
Page 7

Resolution No. 294, C. D. 1929, Series of 1929, Contra.

No changes of any nature shall be made in the Official Zoning Maps or matters shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in the ordinance.

It is hereby provided that no change in the Official Zoning Maps which may from time to time be made published, shall be deemed to constitute an official zoning map unless such map shall have been adopted by the Board of Adjustment, and shall be the final authority to correct errors, omissions, statements, and water lines, buildings and other structures in the city.

At the beginning of every fiscal year, the zoning administrator shall furnish an up-to-date copy of the official zoning maps to the City Mayor and the City Council, and shall file them with the Department of Development Planning of the City.

Section 3. - Distinctive Subdivisions: The district boundaries are delineated on the Official Zoning Maps.

In the interpretation of the boundaries fixed for any of the districts shown in the zoning maps, the following rules shall apply:

1. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximate the center of the streets, or highways, street lines, or highway right-of-way lines, such lines shall be construed as to be their respective center lines.

2. Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximate parallel to the center lines of streets, or center lines of right-of-way lines, or of highways, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel to and at such instance boundaries as indicated in the official zoning maps.

3. Where the boundary of a district follows as a railroad line, such boundary shall be deemed to be located in the middle of the main tracks of railroad lines.

4. Where the boundary of a district follows a stream, lake or other bodies of water, said boundary line shall be deemed to be at the line of political jurisdiction between communities, as indicated in the following table:

| Community A | Community B |
|-------------|------------|
| Stream      | Lake       |

5. Where a boundary line divides a lot or exceeds un- subdivided property, the location of such boundary line shall be determined by the official zoning maps using the scales on such maps.

--- [Page 10] ---
Page -10-  
Resolution No. 94, Ordinance No. 35,  
series of 1982, cent'g.1  
7. Where an imaginary zone boundary line divides a lot which was in single ownership at the time it was designated as a conservation area by the zoning administrator's report; as special exception, the extension of the regulations for either portion of the lot not to exceed thirty (30) meters beyond the zone line into the other portion of the lot.  
8. When a running boundary line is indicated on the official cadastral maps, one block down or fraction thereof, such boundary line shall be sealed or determined by the Zoning Administrator.  
9. When reclamation is undertaken in accordance with law, or excavation occurs in fence-row areas, the district boundaries for these areas shall be interpreted in the same manner as the adjacent districts.  
ARTICLE IV  
DISTRICT REGULATIONS  
Section 1.- OTHER TYPES OF LAND USES/BUILDINGS: The location of any building or structure not mentioned in this Ordinance shall be classified by the Zoning Administrator upon recommendation of the Planning and Development Board.  
Section 2.-USE REGULATIONS IN U.S. DISTRICT: A District shall be made for recreational purposes and conservation purposes and other compatible uses. Within the District, the allowable uses are as follows:  
1. Commercial forests and forest reserves.  
2. Limited agricultural and o,en field recreational activities.  
3. Frontier and ethnic settlements.  
4. Buildings incidental to the function of the Co. District provided that they do not pose adverse environmental impact.  
The following conditions shall be complied with by all uses and buildings/structures allowed in the Co. District.  
1. No structure or building shall obstruct the view of line of vision of an observer/assembly/tourist standing or situated along a road or thoroughfare from such road or thoroughfare, to the scenic area whose beauty is sought to be preserved.  
2. All constructions or developments must enhance the scenery. Buildings or structure built therein shall blend with the natural surrounding in terms of architectural design and exterior paint.  
3. Billboards shall be prohibited in the conservation/protection zones.  
4. Pollutive industries or activities shall not be allowed in such zones.

--- [Page 11] ---
Page -11-
Resolution No. 974, Ordinance No. 352,
series of 1982 cont'd.
Section 3. THE REGULATIONS IN THE DISTRICT: The A.D. District shall primarily for fee and private agricultural farms, and other compatible uses. The following are the allowable uses under this District:
1. All uses allowed in C0. Districts
2. Primary and Upper Croplands
3. Pasture Lands
4. Fishponds and Croplands
5. Agricultural Settlements
6. Buildings incidental to the function of the A.D. District shall be classified as follows: that they do not pose adverse environmental impacts.
Section 4. THE REGULATIONS IN UPPER DISTRICT: An U.S.D. District shall be primarily for mixed uses and other compatible uses. Refer to the Detailed Official Zoning Map concerning the different zones in this District. Proposed uses within the U.S.D. District not covered by the Detailed Official Zoning Map shall be classified accurately by the designated Zoning Administrator.
Section 5. THE REGULATIONS IN U.S.D. DISTRICT: (Based below)
in the upper district, the U.S.D. District shall be primarily for residential purposes of low and medium densities, and other compatible uses. The following are the allowable buildings, structures and land uses within U.S.D. District:
1. All uses allowed in OF Districts
2. One detached family dwelling
3. One semi-detached family dwelling
4. Two detached family dwelling
5. Two semi-detached family dwelling
6. Customary accessory uses like:
6.1 Servants' quarters
6.2 Private garage
6.3 Guard house
6.4 Others of similar nature
7. Home occupation for one's profession or for engaging in in-house business or industries such as dressmaking, tailoring, baking, running a nail-craft store and the like, provided that:
7.1 Only members of the family residing within the premises shall be engaged in such home occupation;
7.2 The use of the dwelling unit for home occupation shall be clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its occupants and shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the floor area of the dwelling unit shall be used;

--- [Page 12] ---
Page -12-
Resolution No. 364, Ordinance No. 352,
series of 1982, centifd:
7.3 As much as possible there shall be no change in
the outside appearance of the building or premises;
7.4 No house occupation shall be conducted in any accessory building(s);
7.5 No traffic shall be generated by such house occupa-
tions as would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such house occupation shall be met off the street and in a place other than in a required front yard;
7.6 No equipment or process shall be used in such house occupations which will cause noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical interference detectable to the normal senses of the lot; if the occupation is conducted in a single-family residence, the same shall be conducted in a place other than a single family residence. In the use of electrical inter-
ference, equipment and devices shall be used which will not cause visual or audible interference in any radio or television receivers or cause fluctuation in lines, voltage, etc. the premises.
7.7 And that, not more than five (5) outsiders or hired helpers, assistants or employees may be employed.
8. Agricultural facilities for the exclusive use of the members of the family residing within the premises, like:
8.1 Swimming pools
8.2 Golfes, tennis and basketball courts
8.3 Clubhouses and the like.
9. Multi-family dwellings with not more than five (5) families residing.
10. Apartments of not more than five (5) doors
11. Boarding houses accommodating not more than five (5) boarders.
12. Nursing homes and day care centers.
13. Kindergarten, elementary and high schools
14. Ageing schools provided they do not exceed two (2)
classrooms (more or less 700 x 900/Classrooms).
15. Chapels, churches and other places of worship and seminaries
16. Small hospitals, clinics, nursing and convalescent homes with not more than five (5) bed capacity.
17. Retail Drugstores

--- [Page 13] ---
Page -1- 
Resolution No. 674; Ordinance No. 353, 
series of 1922, cont'd. 
18. Filling stations located at least one hundred (100) 
miles away from the nearest residence or any other 
residence including filling station belonging to 
competitors. 
19. Public and semi-public institutions: 
19.1 District halls 
19.2 Community, town square or neighborhood centers 
19.3 Health and agriculture centers 
19.4 Museums and libraries 
19.5 relics and fire stations 
20. Garden and plant nurseries provided on manner of foul 
odor or that providing substance shall be restored. 
21. Three to five star hotels 
22. Commercial centers incidental to residential subdivisions, 
such as shopping centers, billiards, beauty parlors, movie 
houses, restaurants, markets and bakeries, within the 
subdivision's designated commercial areas. 
23. No domestic animals, except dogs, cats, birds and fowls 
shall be permitted to be kept in this district. 
Section 0. - USE REGULATIONS IN N-2 DISTRICTS: (Shaded 
area in expanded zoning map.) - A N-2 District shall 
be mainly for residential purposes of high and other compatible 
uses. The following are the compatible uses allowed therein: 
1. All uses allowed in N-1 District 
2. Multi-family dwellings 
3. Residential condominiums and tenements 
4. Hotels, inns and pension houses excluding motels 
5. Apartments, hostels and apartments 
6. Boarding houses and dormitories 
7. Vegetarian schedules 
8. Clinics, hospitals, nursing or convalescing homes with 
not more than fifty (50) bed capacity except those for 
animals, for insane and for contagious diseases. 
9. Legal occupation as provided for in N-1 district except 
that not more than ten (10) outside or hired janitors, 
assistants, employees and be employed provided that 
no noise is created which is objectionable and undesirable 
for purely domestic or household purposes. 
10. Clubhouses and lodges 
11. Legally raised animals and fowls, provided that: 
a) They are undertaken only for family consumption 
b) No undue noise is created by these pets and fowls 
c) No fowl small is emitted 
d) Other sanitary requirements enforced in the City 
are complied with.

--- [Page 14] ---
Page -14-
Resolution No. 674; Ordinance No. 352;
Series of 1982, Cont'd:
12. Parking lots and parking buildings
13. Messengerial services
14. Offices with no actual display, sales, transfer or handling of commodities in the premises.
15. Organaznages and homes for the aged.
16. Neighborhood stores
17. Parameical service shops such as beauty parlors, barber shops and the like excluding sauna bath and massage clinics.
18. Dry cleaning and laundries with machinery of not more than 3 horses power of electric acter.
Section 7. THE REGULATIONS IN C-1, D-1, E-1, F-1, G-1, H-1, I-1, J-1, K-1, L-1, M-1, N-1, O-1, P-1, Q-1, R-1, S-1, T-1, U-1, V-1, W-1, X-1, Y-1, Z-1, A-1, B-1, C-1, D-1, E-1, F-1, G-1, H-1, I-1, J-1, K-1, L-1, M-1, N-1, O-1, P-1, Q-1, R-1, S-1, T-1, U-1, V-1, W-1, X-1, Y-1, Z-1, A-1, B-1, C-1, D-1, E-1, F-1, G-1, H-1, I-1, J-1, K-1, L-1, M-1, N-1, O-1, P-1, Q-1, R-1, S-1, T-1, U-1, V-1, W-1, X-1, Y-1, Z-1, A-1, B-1, C-1, D-1, E-1, F-1, G-1, H-1, I-1, J-1, K-1, L-1, M-1, N-1, O-1, P-1, Q-1, R-1, S-1, T-1, U-1, V-1, W-1, X-1, Y-1, Z-1, A-1, B-1, C-1, D-1, E-1, F-1, G-1, H-1, I-1, J-1, K-1, L-1, M-1, N-1, O-1, P-1, Q-1, R-1, S-1, T-1, U-1, V-1, W-1, X-1, Y-1, Z-1, A-1, B-1, C-1, D-1, E-1, F-1, G-1, H-1, I-1, J-1, K-1, L-1, M-1, N-1, O-1, P-1, Q-1, R-1, S-1, T-1, U-1, V-1, W-1, X-1, Y-1, Z-1, A-1, B-1, C-1, D-1, E-1, F-1, G-1, H-1, I-1, J-1, K-1, L-1, M-1, N-1, O-1, P-1, Q-1, R-1, S-1, T-1, U-1, V-1, W-1, X-1, Y-1, Z-1, A-1, B-1, C-1, D-1, E-1, F-1, G-1, H-1, I-1, J-1, K-1, L-1, M-1, N-1, O-1, P-1, Q-1, R-1, S-1, T-1, U-1, V-1, W-1, X-1, Y-1, Z-1, A-1, B-1, C-1, D-1, E-1, F-1, G-1, H

--- [Page 15] ---
Page 15

Resolution No. 074, Ordinance No. 355,
series of 1982, cont'd.

5.2 Pools, tennis and basketball courts
5.3 Swimming pools
5.4 Day and night clubs, cabarets and beer houses subject to provisions of n.s. 1224, r.p., ss. 252 and 256, and other laws and guidelines.
5.5 Billiard hall
5.6 Bowling lanes provided that it is located not less than 200 meters from any institutional or residential structures.
5.7 Gymnasiums and auditoria with off-street parking consistent with the providing standards of f.d., 109c.
6. Personal services shops alike:
6.1 Beauty parlors and barber shops
6.2 Sauna bath and massage clinics subject to other laws
6.3 Dressmaking and tailoring shops
6.4 Laundries and laundromats
7. Restaurants and eateries
8. Banjo/piano houses, bar and disco joints provided that it is located not less than 200 meters from any institutional buildings or land uses
9. Short term special education like:
9.1 Dancing Schools
9.2 Schools for self defense
9.3 Driving schools
9.4 Speech clinics
10. Custodial services like:
10.1 Security guard
10.2 Maintenance services
10.3 Janitorial services
11. Radio and television stations
12. Hardware or building/construction materials stores or establishments including their adjacent incidental storage areas containing combustibles/inflammable pollutants/ offensive materials)
13. Manufacture of bakery products including bread, cakes, biscuits, doughnuts, hydra, eggs, wafer and other similar products.
14. and any other commercial uses of similar nature

--- [Page 16] ---
Page -16-
Resolution No. 894, Ordinance No. 353,
series of 1982, cont'd.
Section 8.-USE REGULATIONS IN C-2 DISTRICTS: (Shaded light red in the Expanded Zoning Map) A C-2 District shall be devoted mainly for commercial and compatible industrial uses and other compatible uses as provided herewith:
1. All uses allowed in C-1 District
2. Repair shops like:
2.1 House appliance repair shop
2.2 Motor vehicles and accessory repair shops
2.3 House furnishing shops
2.4 Electrical and mechanical equipment repair shops
3. Mortuaries and crematory services and embalming establishments, subject to the approval of the City Health Department.
3.1 Funeral Parlors/Memorial Homes with adequate off street parking space (see parking standards of P.D. 1096) and provided that they shall be established not less than 50 meters from any residential structures, churches and other institutional buildings.
4. Notifies provided it is located not less than 200 meters from any institutional buildings/structures.
5. Second hand establishment, or stores dealing in second hand items particularly general merchandise/dry goods but excluding junkyards.
6. Cottage and home industries including repacking and re bottling.
7. Cold storage
8. Nobile and stationary light and heavy machineries and equipment stores.
9. Ice, ice cream and ice drop plants with machineries/ devices not to exceed 150 horse power.
10. Plants for tire, recapping, vulcanizing, woodwork, machine, steel, metal workshops, with electric motor not to exceed 75 horse power.
11. Race tracks, jai-alai fronts and cockpits, subject to revised Administrative Code and F.D. Res. 199, and F.D. Res. 200 and other laws and regulations which regulate off street parking spaces (see parking standards of P.D. 1096).
12. Other commercial establishments of similar nature.
13. Manufacture of noodles including macaroni, spaghetti, vermicelli, bijon, and nieque.
13.1 Manufacture of wearing apparel, including custom tailoring and dressmaking shops, hats, clothes, hangers, ties, scarves, handkerchiefs, and clothing accessories, including raincoats, leather jackets

--- [Page 17] ---
Page -17-
Resolution No. 6/4, Effective Date: 2003,
series of 1992, continuation
13.2 Manufacture of musical instruments including organ, pianos, and percussion instruments, with the exception of the lute.
13.3 Manufacture of Office, computing and accounting machinery including typewriters, cash registers, weighing and duplicating machines and electric data processing machines.
13.4 Manufacture of sporting and athletic good (except firearms) including gloves and mitts, a, sorting balls, gym and playground equipment and sporting tables.
13.5 Manufacture of radio, television and communication equipment including radio and television receiving sets, transmitters, telegraph equipment, tape recorders and other audio recording equipment, phonographs or record players and other electric apparatuses.
13.6 Manufacture of hollow decorative blocks, concrete pipes and other masonry products.
13.7 Manufacture strictly for display
13.8 Manufacture of professional and scientific measuring and controlling equipment including thermometers, ammeters, barometers, chemical balance, plumb bob, rain gauges, unisets, thermostat, water meters and the like.
13.9 Manufacture of medical, surgical supplies and equipment including adhesive tapes, antiseptic dressings, bandages, surgical instruments, artificial limbs, prosthetic appliances and other medical equipment.
13.10 Manufacture of photographic and optical goods including eyeglasses and spectacles, optical lenses, and related goods.
13.11 Manufacture of watches and clocks and other signal and detection equipment.
Section 9- USE REGULATION IN I-1 DISTRICTS: (applied light violet in xx-except zoning Map) I-1 District shall be pri- narily manufacturing industries classified as non-pollutive and non-hazardous (n/p/h), non-pollutive and hazardous (n/p/h) and other compatible uses as provided hereunder.
1. All uses allowed in C.2 District.
2. Non-pollutive and hazardous (n/p/h) such as:
2.1 Manufacture of garments, textile bags, canvas bags and other canvas products, cutt bags, life belts, suspenders, and other similar functional items.
2.2 Manufacture of footwear including shoes, slippers and sandals.
Continued on Page -18-

--- [Page 18] ---
Page 10
Resolution No. 924; Ordinance No. 568;
series of 1932, sec. 4.
2.3 Manufacture of products of leather and leather
substitutes including luggage, hagsbags, wallets
and similar products.
2.4 Manufacture of wood, bamboo, rattan, nipa and
other indigenous material products including
wooden furniture, furniture, curtains, carvings
and other crafts.
2.5 Manufacture of pulp stationaries and other related
articles.
3. All food processing and bottling plants provided that
they install adequate anti-pollution devices.
4. Woodwork, steel, and metal factories with electric
motors not to exceed 500 h.p., including their incidental
equipment like kiln ovens for exclusive use of their own
products.
5. Cigar, cigarette and chewing tobacco factories.
6. Tape factories utilizing electric motors.
7. Plastic industries utilizing electric motors.
8. Nails, belts, mats, and drew factories.
9. Glue and Galatting plants not using animal wastes as
raw materials, with adequate anti-pollution devices
10. Radio and TV relay or transmitting stations
11. Electrically fired foundries and assaying laboratories
12. Open Storage: Provided they are located at least 50
meters away from institutional and residential buildings.
13. Lighy-wards with light sawmill not to exceed 150 h.p.
14. Public utility bus terminals/garage/where such vehicles
are stored, kept, maintained and repaired including
garages for storage of spare parts and other accessories.
15. Warehouses for sugar, cane, forest produce, coffee,
fertilizers, rice, corn, cement, sugar, soap, similar
fibres including goods, wares, merchandise and other
utilities.
16. Light rice and corn mills not to exceed 150 h.p.
17. Junk yards and scrap iron establishments
18. Bottling Plants for asphalt and similar products
19. And other industries of similar nature.
Section 10.-WHEN REGULATION IN 1-2 DISTRICTS (Shaded in
black) and Expanded Zoning Map 1-2 District shall be
designated as "Fog" areas where there is a danger of
serious pollution and extremely hazardous (H/P/HI), pollutive and non-
Continued on Page 19.

--- [Page 19] ---
Page -19-
Resolution No. 694, Ordinance No. 35, series of 1964, cont'd.
hazardous (P/Mi), pollutive and hazardous (P/Hi), pollutive and extremely hazardous (P/Hi), highly pollutive and non-hazardous (H/Mi), high pollutive and extremely hazardous (H/Hi) by the jurisdictional authority for all customary subject facili-
ties and services to said district.
1. All uses allowed in L1 except food and drinks processing and bottling plants; however, the same may be allowed upon approval of the City Executive and recommendation of the City Planning and Development Board and proper evaluation of the zoning Administrator.
2. Large scale coconut, vegetables and other oil pro-
cessing/manufacturing plants with adequate anti-
pollution device(s).
3. Plywood and veneer processing or manufacturing plants or factories
4. Heavy wood processing or manufacturing plants or factories
5. All other large scale manufacturing or processing Plants provided that they install adequate anti-
pollution device(s).
Section 11. - USE REGULATIONS IN OP. DISTRICT: (inserted blue in expanded zoning map) An OP District shall be mainly for institutional uses whether public or private, and other compatible uses. The allowable uses within this district are as follows:
1. All government institutional buildings
2. All types of religious buildings
3. All levels of educational complexes
4. All kinds of cultural and historical landmarks and structures
5. Public and private hospitals, clinics, health centers and the like
6. Special public and private institutional buildings
7. Any and other institutional buildings and land uses of similar nature.
Section 12. - USE REGULATIONS IN OP. DISTRICT: An OP District shall be primarily for open space uses, and other compatible uses as provided hereunder:
1. Parks and playgrounds
2. Season sports
3. Camp sites
4. Open field cultural and historical sites
5. Golf courses and other athletic fields
6. Botanical and archaeological gardens
7. Arboriculture
8. Agricultural uses excluding fowl and animal raising
y. Building incidental to the functions of the OP. District.

--- [Page 20] ---
**Page 4**

**Section 1:** **New Airborne Dust in DP. DPT. (1)** - (Whitish yellow- expanded zoning map) - A DP. District shall be mainly for buildings, structures, and land uses cited hereunder which are classified as special uses. Their locations shall be determined by the DP. District Commission in accordance with the requirements of the Department of Public Works and Consistent with the requirements below:

1. Dumping Sites:
   1.1 Adequate fencing shall be put up to prevent undue scattering of waste.
   1.2 Inspection of rats and spraying of flies and the general maintenance of the dumping site shall be the sole responsibility of the applicant.
   1.3 The dumping site shall not be located outside of the applicant's premises if private.
   1.4 It shall be located at least one hundred (100) meters away from the nearest known/identified water table or potable water source, and should be at least fifteen feet from the nearest residential zone or fifteen to twenty minutes travel time by garage truck.
   1.5 It shall not be located along waterways, rainbows, and drainage channels.
   1.6 A written authority to establish and operate shall be obtained from the City Health Department.

2. Incineration Plants:
   2.1 They shall not be located within residential zones.
   2.2 They shall not constitute safety hazards to the adjacent land uses and to the community in general.
   2.3 They shall provide anti-pollution devices (e) and acquire clearances and certificates of anti-pollution compliance from the National Pollution Control Board.
   2.4 Their sound maintenance shall be the sole responsibility of the applicants any or the persons running them.

3. Cemeteries and Memorials:
   3.1 They shall be located outside of or within reasonable distance from highly populated areas.
   3.2 Their proper maintenance shall be the exclusive duty of the applicant or persons running them.
   3.3 They shall not contain sources of water.
   3.4 A written authority to construct and operate shall be obtained from the City Health Department.
   3.5 They shall comply with all the pertinent provisions of the National Building Code of the Philippines (Act No. 1974).

--- [Page 21] ---
Page -21-
Resolution No. 394, Ordinance No. 765,
series of 1982, cont'd.
4. Satellite ground stations -
4.1 They shall obtain locational approval from the
Ministry of Human Settlement
4.2 They shall obtain clearance and certificate of
anti-pollution compliance from the National Pol-
lution Control Commission.
5. Private landing strip, runways, heliports and helipads -
5.1 They shall not be located within residential areas
5.2 A written authority to construct and operate shall
be obtained from the Civil Aeronautics Administration
by the applicant; and a notice shall be posted or
published in at least one of the daily newspapers
to determine public opposition to the proposed
landing strip.
Section 14. BUILDING REGULATIONS: The heights of the building
and structure shall be measured in accordance with the procedure
set forth in the National Building Code of the Philippines (see
Section 707, P.D. No. 1096).
1. For Cc., Ag., and Op. District:
No building or structure for human occupancy, shall
exceed nine and one-half (91/2) stories in height and
shall not contain more than two (2) stories.
2. For R-1 District:
No building or structure for human occupancy shall
exceed thirteen and one-half (131/2) meters in height and
shall not contain more than three (3) stories.
3. For R-2 District:
No building or structure for human occupancy shall
exceed fifteen (15) meters in height and shall not
contain more than four (4) stories.
4. For all other Districts:
Heights limitation of building or structure for human
occupancy shall follow provisions of the National
Building Code of the Philippines (P.D. No. 1096).

--- [Page 22] ---
**Page 22**

Resolution No. 921, Ordinance No. 358, Series of 1962, continued:

5. The height limitation of buildings or structures critical to airplane flight paths or along air traffic routes shall be determined by the Civil Aeronautic Commission; provided, however, that it will not exceed the maximum height required in the particular district.

SECTION 1. - (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (A) (

--- [Page 23] ---
PAGES -3-

--- [Page 24] ---
Page 24

Resolutions No. 901; Ordinance No. 153;

Series 21; Volume 18.

Section 5. - Building on Rear Lot: - No building used or designated to be used as residence shall be allowed on any rear lot unless such lot has a right-of-way easement over a path of at least four inches leading to a street. Two or more buildings, however, may be located on the same lot if the right-of-way easement is at least six inches wide.

Section 6. - Proximity to Safe Access: - Every building hereafter erected or moved shall have access to a public street or an approved private street, and all structures shall be so located on lots as to provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection, and shall have the required off-street parking.

Section 7. - Residential Compound: - Where it is impracticable to apply the requirements of this Ordinance to individual buildings within a district where the compound is located, a permit for the construction of such compound may be issued provided that the plan thereof conforms to the following conditions:

1. That the building are to be used only for residential purposes and each accessory use are permitted in the district where the compound is located.

2. That the average lot area per family or dwelling unit in the compound, excluding the land occupied by itself, is not less than the lot area per family required in the district.

3. That there is provided, within the tract on which the residential compound is to be located, an open space for playground purposes within an area equivalent to at least an aggregate area of five percent of the total lot area of the compound, but not less than one hundred square meters, provided that where the residential compound is intended for less than one hundred square meters, such open space for playground purposes may be dispensed with, and provided further, that when an open space for playground purposes is set aside, this open space may be as part of the yard requirements for the compound.

4. That there is provided, within the tract on which the residential compound is to be located, a screened or immediately accessible off-street parking area, depending on the needs of the residents and their visitors.

Section 9. - Exceptions: - When it is impracticable to apply the requirements of this Ordinance to certain developments the zoning administrator may, on grounds of innovative development techniques grant a special development permit for the purpose provided the following conditions are complied with:

1. That the proposed land uses will not alter the essential character of the zone, especially its population density, number of dwelling units per hectare, and the character land use of the zone.

--- [Page 25] ---
Page -27-
Resolution No. 934, Ordinance No. 568,
series of 1932, ccn. d. 41
2. That the area subject of application is a consoli-
dated parcel of land or at least one (1) hectare,
3. The preliminary development plan must generally set forth any existing or proposed arrangements of lots, streets, access points, buffer strips, and rail, water, or other transportation arrangements within the relationship or extent of land involved to surrounding properties.
4. That final development plan must, in addition to the above cited requirements, describe the noise, smoke, odor, vibration, dust, dirt,noxious gases, glare and heat, fire hazards, industrial waste and traffic which may be produced by the development;
5. The final development plan must be submitted to the City Planning and Development Board for review and recommendation and to the City Executive for approval.
6. If the proposed development will alter the essential characteristics of the zone and existing proposed road(s) then the approval of the Sangguniang Zamboanga is deemed necessary.
ARTICLES VI
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT
Section 1.- ENVIRONMENTAL STANDARDS: All land uses, developments or constructions shall conform to the following standards:
1. Noise and vibrations
All noises and vibrations producing machinery shall be enclosed by a building and shall be provided with effective noise absorbing materials, noise silencers and mufflers, an open yard of a distance of not less than 10 feet from the building, and a row of trees along property lines and property planted to dense trees as windbreaks. To minimize vibration, a machinery shall be mounted on shock-absorbing mountings, such as each bearing of a motor, or on a foundation consisting of isolated foundation set on piles, as needed by the machinery. Minimum noise which is objectionable due to vibration shall be that frequency of high power diesel building as tested and approved by the City Officials concerned.
2. Smoke
Any smoke emitted from any source for period aggregating seven (7) minutes or any thirty minutes particularly starting a new fire shall have a density not greater than No. 2 of the Singinglass Chart.
3. Dust, dirt, and fly ash
The emission of dust, dirt, or fly ash from any source of activity which shall pollute the air and render it unclean, destructive, unhealthy or hazardous, or cause

--- [Page 26] ---
Page -26-
Resolution No. 574; Ordinance No. 351,
series of 1928, cont'd:
visibility to be impaired, shall not be permitted.
In no case whatever shall dust, dirt, or fly ash be allowed to exceed 0.08 grams per cubic meter of fuel gas at stack temperature of 60 centigrade not to create a haze with opacities equivalent to or greater than Fig. 1 of the Aljelalman Chart.
4. Odors and gases
The emission of foul odors and gases deleterious to public health, safety and general welfare shall not be permitted. Buildings containing such sources of foul odors and gases shall be enclosed by air tight building provided with air conditioning system, filters, deodorizing and other air cleaning equipment.
5. Gases and heat
Gases and heat from any operation or activity shall not be allowed to be radiated, even or felt from any point beyond the limits of the property.
6. Industrial waste
Industrial plant wastes shall be disposed of only in a manner which will not create any nuisance dangerous to adjoining properties or to the community in general.
7. Sewage disposal
Waste sewage dangerous to the public health, safety and general welfare shall be discharged into any public sewer system, natural waterway or drainage channel.
The applicant shall submit to the Board of Health, the following information: shall comply with pertinent requirements of the National Pollution Control Commission.
Acidity or alkalinity shall be neutralized to a pH of between 6.0 and 8.0 as a daily average on a volumetric basis with a temporary variation of 5.0 to PH 16.0 Waste water shall not contain oil and grease in excess of 300 PPM or exceed a daily average of 100PPM.
Section 2.- ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH ASSESSMENT/STATEMENT:
Major construction/development/activities may be required by the zoning Administrator to submit an Initial Hydromedical Report (IHR) (200 pages minimum). If so required, the following shall be submitted by the applicant:
1. Detailed description of the proposed development or action/construction.
2. Detailed description of the physical, biological, social environment within which the development construction will occur.
3. Detailed description of existing plans which will be affected by the proposed development action.
Continued on Page -26-

--- [Page 27] ---
Page -27-
Resolution No. 894; Ordinance No. 361,
series of 1982, cont'd.
4. Detailed description of other actions planned, or in the course of realization, which will interest with the proposed action, so as to increase or reduce the environmental impact.
5. Detailed description of probable direct, long and induced, impact of the proposed action, on the physical biological and social environment.
6. Comparison of impact of alternative actions.
7. Special emphasis on adverse effects, long term effects, resource commitments, cost benefit analysis.
Section 3.- POLlUTION CONTROL: For effective pollution control, all manufacturing industries classified as pollutive by the Ministry of Health settlements and pollutive agricultural buildings shall be equipped with adequate preventive devices and acquire clearance and certificates of anti-pollution compliance from the National Pollution Control Commission.
Section 4.- PUBLIC SERVICES: In the utilization, exploitation, development, conservation and protection of water resources the following setbacks and/or easements along the entire length of the banks of rivers, creeks and streams, shores of the sea, lakes and similar bodies of water, more than twenty (20) meters setback along banks of waterways in urban areas.
2. Forty (40) meters easement for the same in all agricultural and forested areas.
3. Seventy five (75) meters for shores of the sea, lakes and similar bodies of water.
The above setbacks/easements shall be subject for public use such as for recreation, navigation, floatage, fishing salvage and other activities. The easement shall be measured in accordance with the provisions of Article 10 of the Philippine Building Code (P.L. No. 1096).
Section 6.- CIVILIZATION/UTILIZATION OF RIVER BEDS AND HAND BARS: All river beds or sand bars shall be subject of utilization except upon prior recommendation of the City Planning and Development Board and upon prior permission of the Department of Public Works and Communications. Provided further that no permission shall be granted if it obstructs the flow of water, or if it shall increase the flood levels so as to cause damage to other areas.
ARTICLE VII
NON-COMPLIANCE USES; EXCEPTIONS AND VIOLATIONS
Section 1.- EXISTING NON-COMPLIANCE USES AND BUILDINGS:
All existing buildings or structures and land were legally authorized under previous ordinances which do not conform to these Ordinances at the time of its adoption are considered non-compliance uses.

--- [Page 28] ---
Page 28

Resolution No. 974; Ordinance No. 363;

series of 19xx, section 1:

The lawful uses of these non-conforming buildings or structures and land uses may be continued, provided:

1. That in the application for Certificate of Non- Conformity, the owner or agent of the property shall state that the use(s) is/are legally occupied by the non-conforming user at the time of the adoption of this Ordinance.

2. What no such non-conforming use shall be enlarged or increased greater than one hundred per cent (100%) of the existing floor area of building(s) or land use(s). Provided further that all needed anti-pollution devices are installed.

3. That no such non-conforming use which has ceased for more than one (1) year or has been changed to those permitted in the district in which it is located will again revert as a non-conforming use.

4. That any non-conforming structure or use of non-conforming structures related to one use and under one ownership, which has been damaged by more than $500 by fire, flood, explosion, earthquake, war, riot or other such force majeure, shall be allowed to remain. Any re- construction in it is regard shall be in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance.

5. That no such non-conforming use may be moved in whole or in part or to replace any conforming use.

6. That no such non-conforming use shall be changed to another non-conforming use.

7. Should such structure be moved for any reason to any distance whatsoever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the district in which it is moved or relocated.

8. That pollutive non-conforming uses shall provide necessary pollution abatement not later than two (2) years after the adoption of this Ordinance.

Section 2: - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS FOR BUILDINGS, EXISTING BUILDINGS/STRUCTURES/STRUCTURE AND LAND USES NOT LEGALLY AUTHORIZED OR SANCTIONED UNDER THE CITY'S ZONING ORDINANCE OF 1974, SEC. 1, ANY SUCH STRUCTURES/ BUILDINGS/STRUCTURES/STRUCTURE AND LAND USES MAY BE ALTERED/AMENDED TO CONFIRM WITH THE PROVISIONS OF THIS ORDINANCE.

Any business originally allowed within such structures/buildings (constructed in violation of the City's Zoning Ordinance of 1974) shall immediately cease as soon as and that their respective businesses permit license/engaged within such structures/buildings. Businesses which are authorized in this Code may be issued permits/licenses to operate/engaged within such structures/buildings.

--- [Page 29] ---
Page 23

Resolution No. 954, Ordinance No. 951, series of 1882, continued.

FUSELAGE, buildings/structures/establishments and businesses referred to in this Section except as valid of the provisions of Section 4 (Invitations) and Section 5 (Exemptions and Variances: Provisions for granting the same) under this Article.

However, non-conforming buildings/structures and businesses (established prior to the City's Enabling Act of 1972) which have been permitted by the assessment of this Ordinance, are not covered by the provisions of the preceding paragraphs.

EXEMPT: 1. CERTIFICATES OF NON-CONFORMITY - A certificate of non-conformance of all non-conforming uses shall be applied for by the owner or agent of the property involved within six (6) months from the approval of this ordinance.

Failure to make such application within six (6) months shall be presumptive evidence that the property has a non-conforming use and is in violation of this Ordinance, and shall be considered in violation thereof.

The issuing administrator shall officially inform/notify the proper Committee or the Adjutant General following all applications of Exemption if it has issued within two (2) days after its issuance to the applicant.

DEFINITION 4. DEVIATIONS - Exemptions and variances of deviations from the provisions of this Ordinance may be allowed by the Board Administrator only when the following terms and conditions exist:

1. Variations:
1.1 The property is unique and different from other properties in the adjacent locality and because of its uniqueness will not obtain a reasonable return on the property.
1.2 Conforming to the provisions of the Ordinance will cause undue hardship on the part of the owner or occupant of the property.
1.3 The hereby is not self-created or brought about by reason of the use of building plans or collusions with building officials.
1.4 The proposed variance is the minimum deviation necessary to permit a reasonable use of the property.
1.5 The variance will not alter the essential character of the district or zone where the property for which the variance is sought and located, and will not substantially or permanently injure the use of other property in the district.
1.6 The variance will not weaken the general purpose of the ordinance and will not adversely affect the public health safety or welfare.
1.7 The variance will be in harmony with the spirit of this Ordinance.

2. Exemptions:
2.1 The exception will not adversely affect the public health, safety, and welfare and is in keeping with the general pattern of development in the community.

--- [Page 30] ---
Page 30

Resolution No. 974, Ordinance No. 362, series of 1982, cont'd.

2.2 The exception will not adversely affect the private use of either property in the same district.
2.3 The exception will not alter the essential character of the district where the exception sought is located, and will be in harmony with the general purposes of the ordinance.
2.4 The exception will not weaken the general purpose of the regulation established for the specific district.

Section 5. EXEMPTIONS AND VARIANCES PROCEDURES FOR CHANGING THE DENSITY

The procedure for the granting of an exemption or variance is as follows:

1. A written application for an exemption or variance is filed with the Zoning Administrator, indicating the nature of the changes under which the variance is sought and stating the reasons therefore.

2. The Zoning Administrator shall make preliminary studies on the application and fix the time and place for the hearing, if found necessary.

3. A written notice of the public hearing shall be served on the applicant. The Committee on Planning and Development of the Planning Commission and the owners of the properties adjacent to the property which is subject to the application for variance fifteen (15) days prior to the scheduled public hearing. Notice of such hearing shall also be posted on the property for which the exemption is sought at the City Hall, and one copy shall be furnished to each owner within fifteen (15) days prior to the said public hearing.

4. At the public hearing, any party may appear in person or by an agent or attorney.

5. At the hearing all interested parties shall be afforded the opportunity to be heard and based on the evidence and testimonies presented, the Zoning Administrator shall decide on whether or not to grant variances.

6. The Zoning Administrator shall render a decision within sixty (60) days from the filing of application, inclusive of the time spent for public hearing.

7. The exemptions and variances will be granted by the Zoning Administrator upon recommendation by the Planning and Development Board.

8. Submit an annual report to the City Mayor on the status of exemptions, including number, nature and character of permits granted or denied, non-conforming uses, variances, exceptions, innovative techniques, special and temporary uses, and conditions imposed thereon.

9. Take any other action authorized by this ordinance to ensure compliance with or prevent violation of its provisions.

--- [Page 31] ---
Page 31

Resolution No. 904, Ordinance No. 56, series of 1964, entered:

Section 6. - CERTIFICATES OF LEAVING CAPABILITIES. In accordance with Section 2 of the Building Code of the Philippines (P. L. No. 1096), a Certificate of Leaving Capabilities shall first be obtained from the Zoning Administrator before any building permit can be granted by the Building Official. Such Certificate of Leaving Capabilities shall apply to all buildings or part thereof severed by the application for a building permit, as well as the proposed use of such building, are in conformity with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.

Section 7. - EXPIRATION OF THE CERTIFICATES OF LEAVING CAPABILITIES. If the Certificates of Leaving Capabilities issued under this section are not renewed within six (6) years, said certificates will be cancelled by the Zoning Administrator and a notice thereof shall be given to the persons affected. Certificates of Leaving Capabilities severing a lot or part thereof which is subsequently classified as a residential district shall not be valid unless the classification of the district is changed and said construction shall not conform to the new zoning regulations.

Section 8. - APPEAL. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Zoning Administrator concerning the expirations of the certificates, administration of enforcement of the ordinances, shall appeal to the Zoning Board of Appeals. Such appeal shall be filed within ninety (90) days from the receipt of the notice of the decision or action taken by the Zoning Administrator by filing with the said administrator and with the Board of Appeals specifying the grounds.

The Zoning Administrator shall transmit to the Zoning Board of Appeals all papers pertaining to the case, together with copies thereof, the notice appealed from, and all papers presented in support thereof. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall fix the date, time and place for the hearing of the appeals, giving due consideration to the petitioners and deciding the same within a reasonable time not exceeding sixty (50) days from the filing of the notices of appeal.

Section 9. - QUALIFICATIONS OF BOARD OF APPEALS. An administrative board to be known as the Zoning Board of Appeals is hereby created. It shall be composed of five (5) members, two (2) from the government, one of whom should be a member of the Sangguniang Panlungsod, one from the private sector, and two (2) from the private sector, to be appointed by the City Executive. The Chairman of the Board shall have the right to preside over the meetings of the Board. Two (2) members shall hold office for five (5) years and the other two (2) for three (3) years with reappointment. Appointment to any vacancy shall only for the unexpired portion at the time of the preceding election. The qualifications shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator.

ANNEX VIII

ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT

Section 1. - RESPONSIBILITY OF ADMINISTRATOR AND ZONING OFFICER. This Ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the Zoning Administrator who shall be appointed by the Minister of Housing and Urban Affairs. The Zoning Officer shall be appointed by the City Mayor upon the recommendation of the City Mayor.

Section 2. - QUALIFICATIONS OF THE ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The Zoning Administrator shall be a septennial person of good moral character and shall possess specialized knowledge, training and/or experience.

--- [Page 32] ---
Page 35

Resolution No. 594, Ordinance No. 361, series of 1960, cont'd.

experiences in physical planning, zoning, construction and/or design technology.

Section 3. - KINGS AND BYLAWS - The Zoning Administrators shall administer and enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. Specifically, they shall have the following powers and duties:

1. To grant or deny, with or without conditions, applications for the granting of variances in accordance with the criteria prescribed in Article III Section 3 and Section 4 of this Ordinance;

2. To grant or deny, with or without conditions, applications for the granting of a variance in accordance with the criteria provided in Article VII Section 3 and Section 4 of this Ordinance;

3. To serve notice requiring the removal of any use in violation of this ordinance upon the owner, agent, or tenant of the building or land, or upon the architect, builder, contractor or other person who causes or assists in any such violation;

4. To issue Certificates of Aging Compliances as herein provided;

5. To call upon the City Fiscal to institute any necessary legal proceeding to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance. The City Fiscal is hereby authorized to institute the appropriate action necessary to secure compliance with this Ordinance and to recommend to the Building Official to institute proper legal/critical action for violations of any of the provision of this Ordinance in relation to the pertinent provisions of Rule 1096 (Building Code of the Philippines);

6. To call upon the Chief of Police and his authorized agents to assist in the enforcement of this Ordinance.

7. To report to the City Mayor, City Planning and Development Board and the Zoning Appeals Board all the exceptions and variances granted so that the Official zoning Map can be accurately prepared and maintained. The Zoning Appeals Board shall have the exclusive power to review and approve all exceptions and variances presented in the administration and enforcement of this ordinance, making the necessary recommendation therefor.

Section 8. - POWER OF THE ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS - Decisions of the Zoning Board of Appeals when it is acting as an appeals board, when considering interpretations and applications of the development plan or zoning ordinances and regulations, land use planning or zoning standards, guidelines, rules or regulations in which the Zoning Board of Appeals has been involved, shall be final unless appealed to the Supreme Court of the Philippines.

Section 9. - ZONING REVISES - The Zoning Administration shall be reviewed from time to time when the need arises, by the City Planning and Development Board in coordination with the Zoning Administrators.

Section 10. - FUNCTIONS OF THE NEW BUILDING - The City Planning and Development Board shall have the following zoning functions:

--- [Page 33] ---
**Page 35**

**Section 1:** Review the Zoning Ordinance for the following purposes:

1.1 Determine what amendments or provisions are necessary in the Zoning Ordinance to accommodate changes that might have been introduced in the local development plan.

1.2 Determine what changes would have to be introduced in the local development plan in the light of any provisions of the Zoning Ordinance that have been difficult to enforce or are unconstitutional.

1.3 Identify what provisions of the Ordinance have been difficult to enforce or are unconstitutional.

2. Recommend to the Sangguniang Panlungsod necessary legislative amendments and the needed changes in the local development plan as a result of the review conducted by the Zoning Board.

**Section 2:** The Sangguniang Panlungsod may, from time to time, adopt its own motion upon recommendation of the City Mayor and the City Planning and Development Board, alter, reject, or amend this Ordinance or any provision thereof.

**Section 3:** Any amendment to any of the provisions under Section 1 (above) shall be proceeded with a public hearing whereby the residents within the vicinity/Location where the proposed structures/middles are to be established, shall be notified of such hearing.

Non-compliance with the requirement herein imposed shall invalidate the amendment.

Any doubts/queries/issues over the interpretation/enforcement/implementation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be referred to the ZF for the purpose of determining the legislative intent of each provision.

**Section 4:** BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED PRIOR TO THE ENACTMENT OF THIS ORDINANCE: The provisions of this Ordinance shall be without prejudice to the application of other laws, presidential decrees, letters of authorization and other executive or administrative orders vesting certain powers and duties in the Sangguniang Panlungsod which shall remain in force and effect, provided that land use designations of the national agencies concerned shall be consistent with the development plan of the locality.

**Section 5:** BUILDING PERMITS ISSUED PRIOR TO THE ENACTMENT OF THIS ORDINANCE: The provisions of this Ordinance shall be without prejudice to the application of other laws, presidential decrees, letters of authorization and other executive or administrative orders vesting certain powers and duties in the Sangguniang Panlungsod which shall require any change in the plans, construction, and size of any building, structure or part thereof for which a building permit has been duly granted prior to the adoption of this ordinance, except that no new building permits shall be granted in accordance with existing Zoning Ordinance.

**Section 6:** BUSINESS PERMITS/ACTS/PROVISIONS: As a comple- tory provision to the City's existing ordinance of 1974, no Business/ Merchant/Factory/Factory Plant/Factory Yard shall be granted in favor of any establishment if such establishment is continued on Page 36.

--- [Page 34] ---
**Resolution No. 894, Ordinance No. 365, series of 1982, continued:**

situated/located in non-conforming areas or in areas where such business or establishment is not allowed under the provisions of this Ordinance, particularly Article II, Section 3 to 10, inclusive;

Let it be further provided that all permits and licenses, except those issued by the City Manager, shall be suspended, revoked, and null and void, and shall subject the issuing officials concerned to prosecution under the Anti-Craft Law (R.A. No. 3039) as amended;

Sectors levying/ granting any business/inquiry's Permit or license shall be required to submit to the City Manager for approval, review, and issuance of functions, the proper official/office charged with the duty of issuing such permit or license, shall first ascertain and determine from the files of the Agency Administrator whether the location of the business or establishment is in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.

SECTION 16.- Violation and Penalty: Any person who violates any of the provisions of this ordinance shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than two hundred (P200.00) pesos but not more than two thousand (P2,000.00) pesos or by imprisonment of not less than six (6) months nor more than one (1) year or both at the discretion of the Court. In case of violation, the penalty shall be imposed upon the serving officers thereof.

Violations for second and succeeding offenses shall be punished by a fine of two hundred (P200.00) pesos and six (6) months imprisonment.

SECTION 17.- DEFICIENCY CLAUSE: Should any section or provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be un- constitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the ordinances as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.

SECTION 18.- APPLICABLE CLAUSES: All other ordinances, rules and regulations issued by the City Manager which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby amended, modified or repealed accordingly.

SECTION 19.- EFFECTIVE DATE: This Ordinance shall take effect upon approval.

ENACTED: November 17, 1982.

CACHING: By a majority of ten (10) affirmative votes. (Note: Quorum of 10 was not met when the votes were taken.)

APPROVED:

COMENDO P. MASCARENHAS

Vice Mayor

Acting Secretary, Department of Finance

11/1/82

ELIAS D. LORCA

Mayor, City of Cebu

11/1/82

M. A. S. was approved after the lapse of ten days.