=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 000099-00 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
12th City Council
35th Regular Session
Series of 2000

Present:
Vice Mayor: Luis C. Bonguyan - Presiding Officer
Councillor: Senforiano B. Alfarado
Councillor: Wendel E. Avitado
Councillor: Gerald B. Bangoy
Councillor: Pius C. Braga
Councillor: Sidro S. Caloniges
Councillor: Isidro S. Calonig, Jr.
Councillor: Allan L. Dolor
Councillor: Jimmy G. Dureza
Councillor: Benjamin R. Duarte
Councillor: Emmanuel L. Galicis, Sr.
Councillor: Arvito Calonig
Councillor: Luzviminda C. Ilagan
Councillor: Cornelio Cesar Q. Isaguirre
Councillor: Marlene A. Librado
Councillor: Tomas M. Monteverde
Councillor: Myrna G. L'Daldado-Oritz
Councillor: Cornelio C. rea, III
Councillor: Jose Maria Romano S. Play
Councillor: Pedro R. Salvador
Councillor: Dioscoro B. Sanipaga, Jr.
Councillor: Martin T. Suito
Councillor: Lidro T. Ungab

On Official Business:
Councillor: Clemencia D. Cazaluta-Manila
Councillor: Juan P. Pala, Jr. - Manila

Absent:
Councillor: Nenita R. Orcullo - On Sick Leave

Ordinance No. 099/1/2/9
Series of 2000

AN ORDINANCE TO INSTITUTIONALIZE THE CITY HUMAN RIGHTS ACTION CENTER AND TO PRESCRIBE RULES AND GUIDELINES FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT AND OPERATIONALIZATION OF HUMAN RIGHTS ACTION CENTERS IN EACH AND EVERY BARANGAY OF DAVAO CITY

Be it ordained by the Sangguniang Panlungsod of Davao City in session assembled:

--- [Page 2] ---
Page 2 of 7
Ord. No. 099

SECTION 1. Declaration of Policy: Local government units as stated in the Local Government Code (LRC, Article 3.d) are granted powers to ensure and promote the general welfare and enhance social justice and maintain peace and order for the comfort and convenience of their inhabitants.

To this end, in order to fully promote and protect human rights, the Barangay Human Rights Action Center Program is designed as prescribed by the Department of Interior and Local Government to bring services to the marginalized and disadvantaged barangay levels.

SECTION 2. Objective of the Ordinance: The Ordinance will help the realization of a nationwide mobilization program for human rights protection and advocacy at the city and barangay levels.

Through the Ordinance, the Barangay Human Rights Action Program will be institutionalized and the Commission on Human Rights will be within the reach of the people, especially in the far-flung areas. The Commission on Human Rights Offices are based mainly in the regional centers and capitals of provinces. With the establishment and operationalization of action centers, human rights protection and advocacy are readily brought down to the grassroots.

SECTION 3. Title of Ordinance: This Ordinance shall be known as the Human Rights Action Center Ordinance of Davao City.

SECTION 4. Definitions of Terms:

1. Human rights are defined as the supreme, inherent, and inalienable right to life, to dignity, and to self-development. It is concerned with issues in both areas of civil and political rights, economic, social, and cultural rights founded on internationally accepted human rights obligations to which the Philippine Government is a state party.

2. Commission on Human Rights is the national institution committed to the primacy and sacredness of life through the protection and promotion of human rights.

3. City Human Rights Action Centers is the office established to initiate and operationalize the Barangay Human Rights Action Centers.

4. Barangay Human Rights Action Centers are offices in the barangay established to provide programs and services towards the goal of protecting and promoting human rights advocates.

SECTION 5. The City Human Rights Action Center - The City Human Rights Action Center shall be established and integrated in the City Legal Office.

The City Legal Officer shall be designated as the City Human Rights Coordinator who shall initiate the establishment and operationalization of the Barangay Human Rights Action Centers.

SECTION 6. The City Human Rights Coordinator shall have the following duties and responsibilities:

--- [Page 3] ---
Page 3 of 7
Ord. No. 099

a. as Training and Information Officer:
- Installs and maintains city bulletins
- Distributes human rights information releases
- Reproduces human rights training and information materials
- Coordinates with barangay Human Rights Action Officers for human rights education, seminars and training activities at the city/municipal level

b. as Complaints Processing Officer:
- Consolidates reports of the Barangay Human Rights Action Officers on human rights violation cases filed in every barangay
- Transmits/coordinates the same to the CHR Regional Office
- Assists barangay Human Rights Action Officers in coordinating/monitoring human rights violation cases filed
- Assists victims of human rights violation cases

c. as Coordination and Referral Officer:
- Maintains city (municipal) center on human rights directory of services/programs
- Sets up information center on human rights at the city (municipal) level

d. as Mobilization Officer:
- Mobilizes the community in coordination with barangay Human Rights Action Officers (BHRAOs) to human rights issues, concerns and activities
- Mobilizes at the city (municipal) level human rights advisory group

SECTION 7. The Barangay Human Rights Actions Center - The Barangay Human Rights Action Center shall be established in every barangay within the City of Iloilo.

A Barangay Human Rights Action Officer shall be appointed by the punong barangay with the concurrence of the barangay council. He shall be replaced or terminated also with the concurrence of the barangay council.

SECTION 8. Appointment of Barangay Human Rights Action Officer shall follow the following minimum qualifications:

1. At least a High School graduate;
2. Not less than 21 years of age;
3. Must be a person of probity and integrity;
4. Must not engage in partisan political activities once appointed;
5. Must not be a barangay official or a government employee;
6. Must be a resident of the barangay for at least three years prior to his appointment;
7. Must undergo trainings on human rights education and advocacy equivalent to 48 hours

SECTION 9. Duties and Responsibilities of the Barangay Human Rights Action Officer - The Barangay Human Rights Action Officer (BHRAO) shall:

a. Receive complaints on human rights violations in their respective areas of jurisdiction, refer them to the Commission on Human Rights (CHR) field office for proper action and monitor developments on the complaints; and

--- [Page 4] ---
Page 4 of 7
Ord. No. 099

b. Coordinate, organize and/or conduct human rights information and education drives on a continuing basis within and among LGU officials, officers and employees as well as among the constituents.

SECTION 10. Other Guidelines.

a. The Concept of the Barangay Human Rights Action Center

B H R A O

BARANGAY HUMAN RIGHTS ACTION CENTER

Complaints process Information/education Coordination and referral Mobilization

--- [Page 5] ---
Page 5 of 7
Ord. No. 099

b. Complaints Processing Function

| A C T I V I T Y | Activity Description Responsibility |
| --- | --- |
| Interviews Complainant | - |
| Receives Complaint | - |
| HRV? | - |
| Yes | - |
| Accomplishes Affidavit | - |
| Transmits to RFO/Extension Office | - |
| Investigates Complaint | - |
| No | - |
| Forward Complaint to Lupon ng Tagapamayapa | Accomplishment of Complaint Form BHRAO |
| - | Endorsement of the complaint and supporting documents C/M DC |
| - | CHI/RFO assigns Investigator CHR Investigation |

Note: The document is a flowchart for the processing function of complaints, with activities, descriptions, and responsibilities listed in a structured format.

--- [Page 6] ---
Page 6 of 7
Ord. No. 099

c. Operating Mobilization Structure

Barangay Council
Barangay Captain
Barangay Council for the protection of children
Barangay Captain
Lapong Tappapansayapa
Barangay Captain
Government Extension Workers
BHRAC
Human Rights Advisory Group
- Church
- School
- Barangay based Sectoral Org.
- Women
- Farmer/Fisherman
- Youth
- Labor
- Others
- Barangay based NCOs
Purok Zone

SECTION II. Budget Allocation - The City Government shall provide in its Annual Budget a reasonable honorarium or salary for every Barangay Human Rights Action Officer, and an allocation for capability building training programs, supplies/materials, equipment and other necessary expenses. Expenditures of funds appropriated for this purpose shall conform to the rules and regulations prescribed by the Commission on Audit.

SECTION 12. This Ordinance shall take effect thirty (30) days after its publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Davao.

--- [Page 7] ---
Page 7 of 7
Ord. No. 099

ENACTED, October 10, 2000 by a majority vote of all Members of the Sangguniang Panlungsod.

CERTIFIED CORRECT:

Lolita G. Garcia
Secretary to the Sangguniang Panlungsod
(City Government Department Head II)

ATTESTED:
Luis C. Bonguyan
Vice Mayor
Presiding Officer

APPROVED: Mar. 7 2000

Benjamin C. De Guzman
City Mayor

ATTESTED:
Nestor M. LeDesma
City Administrator