=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 004122-96_10428-4122-96 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
11th City Council
25th Regular Session
Series of 1996
Republika ng Pilipinas
LINGKO NG DABAW
Tanggapan ng Sangguniang Panlungsod
EXCERPT FROM THE MINUTES OF THE REGULAR SESSION OF THE SANGUNIANG
PANLUNGSO, CITY OF DAVAO, HELD ON FRIDAY, JULY 19, 1996.
PRESENT:
Vice Mayor Benjamin C. de Guzman, Presiding Officer
Councilor Pilar C. Braga
Councilor Antonio R. Alabay
Councilor Leonardo R. Avila, III
Councilor Nilo G. Abel Lara
Councilor Bonifacio E. Militar
Councilor Salvador V. Calingles
Councilor Demilo C. Dayanghiang
Councilor Pedro R. Salvador
Councilor Leoncio M. Villanueva, III
Councilor Tomas J. Monteverde, IV
Councilor Alfredo H. Vergara
Councilor Valentino C. Banzon
Councilor Antonio B. Delos Santos
Councilor Isidro T. Ungab
Councilor Pat C. Matias
Councilor Salvador B. Reyes
Councilor Salvador V. Calingles
Councilor Maria Margarita B. Peloton
ON OFFICIAL BUSINESS:
Councilor Victorio S. Atienza
- Manila
Councilor Diedeado A. Mahipus
- Manila
Councilor Shane L. Dolor
- Manila
Councilor Antonio H. Vergara
ABSENT:
Councilor Nazarete K. Navarro, Sr.
- on leave
Councilor Myrna I'Daloc-Otiz
Councilor Mariane A. Librado
Councilor Nenita R. Orulido
RESOLUTION NO. 10A28
The proposed REAL PROPERTY TAX CODE OF DAVAO CITY, which is a revised version of vetoed Ordinance No. 3099, Senate Bill No. 1975, as submitted by the Tax Finance Committee (TFM) of the Legislative Affairs Committee, Finance Committee Ways and Means recommended favorable action thereon, was presented for consideration and appropriate action of the Body by Councilor Aristeo V. R. Alabay.
After careful deliberation, on motion of Councilor Aristeo V. R. Alabay, duly and jointly seconded by Councilors Pilar C. Braga, Frances A. Rosillo, Valeriano M. Villanueva, III, and Tomas J. Monteverde, IV, as sponsored by Councilors Pilar C. Braga, Bonifacio E. Militar, Alfredo H. Vergara and Leonardo R. Avila, III,
it was
RESOLVED, AS IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED, To approve an Ordinance entitled:
Continued on Page -2-

--- [Page 2] ---
Page -2-
Resolution No. 10453;
Ordinance No. 4122;
Series of AYLA CONT'DA:
ORDINANCE NO. 4122
AN ORDINANCE APPROVING THE REAL PROPERTY TAX CODE OF DAVAO CITY.
Be it Ordered by the Sangguniang Panlungsod, City of Davao, that:
ARTICLE I. - TITLE AND SCOPE
SECTION 1. - TITLE: This Ordinance shall be known and referred to as the "REAL PROPERTY TAX CODE OF DAVAO CITY".
SECTION 2. - SCOPE OF THE TAX: There is hereby levied an annual ad valorem tax on all real estate properties within the territorial jurisdiction of Davao City, such as land, building, machinery, and other improvements not herein specifically exempted, at the rate of one and one-eighth percent (1 - 1/8%) basic real property tax, based on the assessed value of the real property.
SECTION 3. - EXEMPTION FROM THE TAX: The following are exempted from the payment of the real property tax, pursuant to Sec. 234 of the Local Government Code:
a) Real property owned by the Republic of the Philippines or any of its political subdivision, except when the beneficial use thereof has been granted, for consideration or otherwise, to a taxable person;
b) Charitable institutions, churches, personages or convents appertaining thereto, mosques, non-profit or religious cemeteries and all lands, buildings, and improvements actually, directly, and exclusively used for religious, charitable or educational purposes;
c) All machineries and equipment that are actually, directly and exclusively used by local water districts, and government-owned-or-controlled corporations engaged in the supply and distribution of water and/or generation and transmission of electric power;

--- [Page 3] ---
Page 3

Resolution No. 10428,

Ordinance No. 4122,

Series of 1996, cont'd.

d) All real property owned by duly registered cooperatives as provided for under R.A. No. 6958; and

e) Machinery and equipment used for pollution control and environmental protection.

SECTION 4. - EXEMPTION WITHDRAWAL. - Except as provided herein, and pursuant to Sec. 23h of the Local Government Code, any exemption from the payment of real property tax previously granted to, or presently enjoyed by, all persons, natural or juridical, including government-owned-or-controlled corporations, is hereby withdrawn.

ARTICLE II - DEFINITION OF TERMS

SECTION 5. - DEFINITION. - The words and phrases as used in this Code shall mean as follows:

a) Acquisition Cost for newly-acquired machinery not yet depreciated and appraised within the year of its purchase refers to the actual cost of the machinery to its present owner, plus the cost of transportation, handling, and installation at the present site.

b) Actual use refers to the purpose for which the property is principally or predominantly utilized by the person in possession thereof.

c) Ad Valorem is a levy on real property determined on the basis of a fixed proportion of the appraised value of the property.

d) Appraisal is the act or process of determining the value of property as of a specific purpose.

e) Assessment is the act or process of determining the value of a property, or proportion thereof subject to tax, including the discovery, listing, classification, and appraisal of properties.

--- [Page 4] ---
Page 1

Resolution No. 10k38,
Ordinance No. 9224,
Series of 1992, cont'd.

f) Assessment Level - is the percentage applied to
the fair market value to determine the taxable value of
the property.
g) Assessed Value - is the appraised value of the
real property multiplied by the assessment level. It
is synonymous to taxable value.
h) Commercial Land - is land devoted principally for
the object of profit and is not classified as agricultural,
industrial, mineral, timber, or residential land.
i) Depreciated Value - is the value remaining after
deducting depreciation from the acquisition cost.
j) Economic Life - is the estimated period over which
it is anticipated that a machinery or equipment may be pro-
fitably utilized.
k) Fair Market Value - is the price at which a prop-
erty may be sold by a seller who is not compelled to
sell and bought by a buyer who is not compelled to buy.
l) Improvement - is a valuable addition made to a
property or an embellishment in its condition, amounting
to more than a mere repair, or replacement of parts in-
volving capital expenditures and labor, which is intended
to enhance its value, beauty or utility or to adapt it
for new or further purposes.
m) Industrial Land - is land devoted principally
to industrial activity as capital investment and is not
classified as agricultural, commercial, timber, mineral
or residential land.
n) Machinery - embraces machines, equipment, mechanical
contrivances, instruments, appliances or apparatus which
may or may not be attached, permanently or temporarily, to

--- [Page 5] ---
Page -5-
Resolution No. 10468;
Ordinance No. 7923
Series of 4775, Cont'd:
the real property. It includes the physical facilities
for production, the installations and appurtenant service
facilities, those which are mobile, self-powered or self-
propelled, and those not permanently attached to the real
property which are actually, directly, and exclusively used
to meet the needs of the particular industry, business or
activity and by their very nature and purpose are
designed for, or necessary to its manufacturing, mining,
logging, commercial, industrial or agricultural purposes.
Machinery which are of general purpose use, including
but not limited to, office equipment, typewriters, telephone
equipment; breakable or easily damaged containers (glass or
cartons), microcomputers, facsimile machines, telex machine,
cash dispensers, furniture and fixtures, freezers, refriger-
ators, display cases, or racks, fruit juice or beverage
automatic dispensing machine which are not directly and
exclusively used to meet the needs of a particular industry,
business or activity shall not be considered within the
definition of machinery under this rule. Residential machinery
shall include machines, equipment, appliances or apparatus
permanently attached to residential land and improvements or
those in movable by destination.
a) Reassessment - is the assigning of new assessed
values to property, particularly real estate, as the result
of a general, partial, or individual reappraisal of the pro-
perty.
p) Remaining Economic Life - is the period of time
expressed in years from the date of appraisal to the date
when the machinery becomes valueless.
Continued on Page -6-

--- [Page 6] ---
Resolution No. 10-628,
Ordinance No. 4322,
Series of 1995, cont'd:
q) Remaining Value - is the value corresponding to the remaining useful life of the machinery.
r) Replacement or Reproduction Cost - is the cost that would be incurred, on the basis of current prices, in acquiring an equally desirable substitute property, or the cost of reproducing a new replica of the property, on the basis of the current prices with the same or closely similar material.
s) Residential Land - is land principally devoted to habitation.
ARTICLE III - SPECIAL LEVIES ON REAL PROPERTY
SECTION 6. - ADDITIONAL LEVY ON REAL PROPERTY FOR THE SPECIAL EDUCATION FUND (SEF). There is hereby levied and collected an annual tax of one percent (1%) of the assessed value of real property which shall be in addition to the basic real property tax under Section 2 hereof. The proceeds thereof shall exclusively accrue to the Special Education Fund (SEF).
ARTICLE IV. - COLLECTION OF REAL PROPERTY TAX
SECTION 7. - DATE OF ACCRUAL OF TAX - The real property tax for any year shall accrue on the first day of January and from the date it shall constitute a lien on the property which shall be superior to any other lien, mortgage, or encumbrance of any kind whatsoever, and shall be extinguished only upon the payment of the delinquent tax.
SECTION 8. - COLLECTION OF TAX - The collection of the real property tax with interest thereon and related expenses, and the enforcement of the remedies provided for in this Ordinance or any applicable law, shall be the responsibility of the City Treasurer.

--- [Page 7] ---
Page -7-
Resolution No. 10428,
Ordinance No. 4125,
Series of 3/10, cont'd:
a) The City Treasurer may deputize the Barangay
Treasurers to collect all taxes on real property located
in the barangay; provided, that the Barangay Treasurer is
properly bonded for the purpose; provided, further, that
the premium on the bond shall be paid by the City Govern-
ment.
b) The City Treasurer or his deputy may determine
only one (1) tax declaration from among the assessment
duplications as issued by the City Assessor, if he is
assured with certainty that such duplications of tax
declaration on one (1) property really exists; Provided,
however, that the tax declaration bearing the highest
property assessment, shall be the basis of computation
for reality taxes under this Ordinance, forwarding a copy
of said action to the City Assessor, who shall make the
necessary correction within sixty (60) days from receipt
thereof.
SECTION 9.- ASSESSOR TO FURNISH LOCAL TREASURER WITH
ASSESSMENT ROLL. The City Assessor shall prepare and submit to
the City Treasury on or before the thirty-first (3lst) day of
December each year, an assessment roll containing a list of all
persons whose real properties have been newly assessed or re-
assessed and the values of such properties.
SEC. 10. - NOTICE OF TIME FOR COLLECTION OF TAX. The City
Treasurer shall, on or before the thirty-first (3rst) day of
January each year, in the case of the basic real property tax and
the additional tax for the Special Education Fund (SEF) or on any
other date to be prescribed by the Sanggunian concerned in the case
of any other tax levied under this title, post the notice of the
dates when the tax maybe paid without interest at a conspicuous
and publicly accessible place of the City or District Barangay Hall.

--- [Page 8] ---
Page 2

Resolution No. 10bcs6,

Ordinance No. 4752,

Series of 3994, count 4:

Said notice shall likewise be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the locality once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks.

SECTION 11.- PAYMENT OF REAL PROPERTY TAXES IN INSTALLMENTS.

The owner of the real property or the person having legal interest therein may pay the basic real property tax and the additional tax for Special Education Fund (SEF) due thereon without interest in four (4) equal installments, the first installment to be due and payable on or before March thirty-first (31st) the second installment on or before June thirty (30); the third installment on or before September thirty (30); and the last installment on or before December thirty-first (31st), except the special levy the payment of which shall be governed by ordinance of the Sangguniang Panlungsod.

The date for the payment of any other tax imposed under this ordinance without interest shall be prescribed by the Sangguniang Panlungsod.

Payments of real property taxes shall first be applied to prior years delinquencies, interests, and penalties, if any, and only after said delinquencies are settled may tax payments be credited for the current period.

SECTION 12.- TAX DISCOUNT FOR ADVANCED PROMPT PAYMENT.

a) If the basic real property tax and the additional tax accruing to the Special Education Fund (SEF) are paid in advance in full on or before March 31 of every year, the taxpayer is entitled to a ten percent (10%) discount.

b) However, said taxes may also be paid in four (4) equal installments without interest, if the taxpayer pays the same every quarter as they fall, in accordance with the installment schedules prescribed under Section 11 above.

--- [Page 9] ---
Page 9

Resolution No. 1048,
Ordinance No. 4122
Series of 3995 Cont'd.

Provided, further, that such discount shall be granted only to properties without delinquencies, provided, finally, that payment of either the basic tax only or SEP only shall not entitle the taxpayer to any discount under this ordinance.

SECTION 13. - PAYMENT UNDER PROTEST

a) No protest shall be entertained unless the taxpayer first pays the tax. There shall be annotated on the tax receipts the words "paid under protest". The protest in writing must be filed within thirty (30) days from payment, of the tax to the City Treasurer, who shall decide the protest within sixty (60) days from receipt.

b) The tax or a portion thereof paid under protest, shall be held in trust by the City Treasurer.

c) In the event that the protest is finally decided in favor of the taxpayer, the amount or portion of the tax protested shall be refunded to the protestant, or applied as tax credit against his existing or future tax liability.

d) In the event that the protest is denied or upon the lapse of the sixty day period prescribed in subparagraph (a), the taxpayer may avail of the remedies as provided for in Chapter 3, Title II, Book II of the Local Government Code of 1997.

SECTION 14. - REIMBURSEMENT OF EXCESSIVE COLLECTIONS - When an assessment of basic real property tax, or any tax levied under this Ordinance, is found to be illegal or erroneous and the tax is accordingly reduced or adjusted by an appropriate judicial or administrative body, the taxpayer may file a written claim for refund or credit for taxes and interests with the City Treasurer within two (2) years from the date of taxpayer is entitled to such reduction or adjustment.

--- [Page 10] ---
Page -10-
Resolution No. 10468,
Ordinance No. 3725,
Series of 1996 cont'd.
The City Treasurer shall decide the claim for tax credit within sixty (60) days from receipt thereof. In case the claim for tax credit is denied, the taxpayer may avail of the remedies as provided in Chapter 3, Title II Book II of the Local Government Code of 1991.
SECTION 15. - NOTICE OF DELINQUENCY IN THE PAYMENT OF THE REAL PROPERTY TAX. a) When the real property tax or any other tax imposed under this ordinance becomes delinquent, the City Treasurer shall immediately cause a notice of the delinquency to be posted at the main entrance of the City Hall and in a publicly accessible and conspicuous place in each barangay of the City. The notice of delinquency shall also be published once a week for two (2) consecutive weeks, in a newspaper of general circulation in the City.
b) Such notice shall specify the date upon which the tax became delinquent and shall state that personal property may be distrained to effect payment. It shall likewise state that at any time before the distraint of personal property, payment of the tax with surcharges, interests and penalties may be made in accordance with the next following Section, and unless the tax, surcharges and penalties are paid before the expiration of the year for which the tax is due except when the notice of assessment or special levy is contested administratively or judicially pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 3, Title II, Book II of the Local Government Code, the delinquent real property will be sold at public auction, and the title to the property will be vested in his purchaser, subject however, to the right of the delinquent owner of the property or any person having legal interest therein to redeem the property within one (1) year from date of sale.

--- [Page 11] ---
Page 11

Resolution No. 10928;
Ordinance No. 4723;
Series of 1975, cont'd:

SECTION 16. INTERESTS ON UNPAID REAL PROPERTY TAX. In case of failure to pay the basic real property tax or any other tax levied under this Ordinance upon the expiration of the periods as provided in Section 250 of R.A. 7160, or when the due, as the case may be, shall subject the taxpayer to the payment of interest at the rate of two percent (2%) per month on the unpaid amount of a fraction thereof until the delinquent tax shall have been fully paid; Provided, however, that in no case shall the total interest on the unpaid tax or portion thereof exceed thirty-six (36) months.

SECTION 17. REMEDIES FOR THE COLLECTION OF REAL PROPERTY TAX. For the collection of the basic real property tax and any other tax levied under this Ordinance, the City Government may avail of the remedies by administrative action through distraint and levy on real property or by judicial action.

SECTION 18. LOCAL GOVERNMENT LIEN. The basic real property tax and any other tax levied under this Ordinance constitutes a lien on the property subject to tax, superior to all liens, charges or encumbrances in favor of any person, irrespective of the owner or possessor thereof, enforceable by administrative or judicial action, and may be extinguished upon payment of the tax and the related interests and expenses.

SECTION 19. Levy on Real Property. After the expiration of the time required to pay the basic real property tax or any other tax levied under this Ordinance, real property subject to such tax may be levied upon through the issuance of a warrant on or before, or simultaneously with, the institution of the civil action for the collection of the delinquent tax. The City Treasurer when issuing a warrant of levy shall prepare a duly authenticated certificate showing the name of the delinquent owner of the property or person having legal interest therein, the description of the property, the Continued on Page 12.

--- [Page 12] ---
Page -12-
Resolution No. 10428,
Ordinance No. 4725,
Series of 1996 cont'd.;
amount of the tax due and the interest thereon. The warrant shall operate with the force of a legal execution through out the City. The warrant shall be mailed to or served upon the delinquent owner of the real property or person having legal interest therein, or in case he is out of the country or cannot be located, to the administrator or occupant of the property. At the same time, written notice of the levy with the attached warrant shall be served upon the Assessor and the Register of Deeds of the City, who shall annotate the levy on the tax declaration and certificate of title of the property, respectively.
The levying officer shall submit a report on the levy to the Sanggunian within ten (10) days after receipt of the warrant by the owner of the property or person having legal interest therein.
SECTION 20. - ADVERTISEMENT AND SALE. - Within thirty (30) days after service of the warrant of levy, the City Treasurer shall proceed to publicly advertise for sale or auction for a period of at least thirty (30) days, the property or a usable portion thereof as may be necessary to satisfy the tax delinquency and expenses of sale. The advertisement shall be effected by posting; a notice at the main entrance of the City Hall building and in a publicly accessible and conspicuous place in the barangay where the real property is located, and by publication once a week, for two (2) consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. The advertisement shall specify the amount of the delinquent tax, the interest due thereon and expenses of sale, the date and place of sale, the name of the owner of the real property or person having legal interest therein, and a description of the property to be sold. At any time before the date fixed for the sale, the owner of the real property or person having legal interest therein may stay the proceedings by paying the delinquent tax, the interest due thereon and the expenses of sale.
Continued on Page -13-

--- [Page 13] ---
Page -13-
Resolution No. 10K36,
Ordinance No. 4722,
Series of 1995, cont'd:
The sale shall be held either at the main entrance of the City Hall building, or on the property to be sold, or at any other place as specified in the notice of the sale.
Within thirty (30) days after the sale, the local Treasurer or his Deputy shall make a report of the sale to the Sangunisang Panlungsod, which report shall form part of his records. The City Treasurer shall likewise prepare and deliver to the purchaser a certificate of sale which shall contain the name of the purchaser, a description of the property sold, the amount of the delinquent tax, the interest due thereon, the expenses of sale and a brief description of the proceedings. Provided, however, that proceeds of the sale in excess of the delinquent tax, the interest due thereon, and the expended of sale shall be remitted to the owner of the real property or person having legal interest therein.
The City Treasurer may, by ordinance duly approved, advance an amount sufficient to defray the costs of collection thru the remedies provided for in this Ordinance, including the expenses of advertisement and sale.
SECTION 21.-REDEMPTION OF PROPERTY SOLD. Within one (1) year from the date of sale, the owner of the delinquent real property or person having legal interest therein, or his representative, shall have the right to redeem the property upon payment to the City Treasurer of the amount of the delinquent tax, including the interest due thereon, and the expenses of sale from the date of delinquency to the date of sale, plus interest of not more than two percent (2%) per month on the purchase price from the date of sale to the date of redemption. Such payment shall invalidate the certificate of sale issued to the purchaser and the owner of the delinquent real property or person having legal interest therein.
Continued on Page -14-

--- [Page 14] ---
Page -14-  
Resolution No. 10428,  
Ordinance No. 4722,  
Series of 1996, cont'd.:  
shall be entitled to a certificate of redemption.  
From the date of sale until the expiration of the period of redemption, the delinquent real property shall remain in the possession of the owner or person having legal interest therein who shall be entitled to the income and other fruits thereof.  
The City Treasurer or his deputy, upon receipt from the purchaser of the certificate of sale, shall forthwith return to the latter the entire amount paid by him plus interest of not more than two percent (2%) per month. Thereafter, the property shall be free from the lien of such delinquent tax, interest due thereon and expenses of sale.  
SECTION 22.-FINAL DEED TO PURCHASER - In case the owner or person having legal interest fails to redeem the delinquent property as provided herein, the City Treasurer shall execute a deed conveying said property to the purchaser, free from lien of the delinquent tax, interest due thereon and expenses of sale. The deed shall briefly state the proceedings upon which the validity of the sale rests.  
SECTION 23.-PURCHASE OF PROPERTY BY THE CITY GOVERNMENT FOR WANT OF BIDDER. - In case there is no bidder for the real property advertised for sale as provided herein, or if the highest bid is for an amount insufficient to pay the real property tax and the related interest and costs of sale, the City Treasurer conducting the sale shall purchase the property in behalf of the City Government to satisfy the claim and within two (2) days thereafter shall make a report of his proceedings which shall be reflected upon the records of his office. It shall be the duty of the Register of Deeds concerned upon registration with his office of Continued on Page -15-

--- [Page 15] ---
Page 15

Resolution No. 109x8,
Ordinance No. M24,
Series of 1996, cont'd:

any such declaration of forfeiture to transfer the title of the forfeited property to the City Government without the necessity of an order from a competent court.

Within one (1) year from the date of such forfeiture, the taxpayer or any of his representative, may redeem the property by paying to the City Treasurer the full amount of the real property tax and the related interest and the cost of sale. If the property is not redeemed as provided herein, the ownership thereof shall be fully vested on the City Government.

SECTION 24. - RESALE OF REAL ESTATE TAKEN FOR TAXES, FEES, OR CHARGES. The Sangguniang Panlungsod may, by Ordinance duly approved, and upon notice of not less than twenty (20) days, sell and dispose of the real property acquired at public auction under the preceding section. The proceeds of the sale shall accrue to the general fund of the City Government.

SECTION 25. - FURTHER DISTRAINT AND LEVY. Levy may be repeated if necessary until the full amount due, including all expenses, is collected.

SECTION 26. - COLLECTION OF REAL PROPERTY TAX THROUGH THE COURT. The City Government may enforce the collection of the real property tax or any other tax levied under this ordinance by civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction. The civil action shall be filed by the City Treasurer through the City Legal Officer within the period prescribed by law.

SECTION 27. - ACTION ASSAILING VALIDITY OF AUCTION SALE. No court shall entertain any action assailing the validity of any sale at public auction of real property or rights therein under this ordinance until the taxpayer shall have deposited with the Continued on Page 16

--- [Page 16] ---
Page 16

Resolution No. 10458,

Ordinance No. 9127,
Series of 1996, cont'd:

court the amount for which the real property was sold, together
with interest of two percent (2%) per month from the date of sale
to the time of the institution of the action. The amount so deposited
shall be paid to the purchaser at the auction sale if the deed is
declared invalid but shall be returned to the depository if the
action fails.

Neither shall any court declare a sale at public auction
invalid by reason of irregularities or infirmities in the proceed-
ings unless the substantive rights of the delinquent owner of the real
property or the person having legal interest therein have been impaired.

SECTION 26. - PAYMENT OF DELINQUENT TAXES ON PROPERTY SUBJECT
OF CONVEYANCE. In any action involving the ownership or possession
of, or succession to, real property, the court may, suo prope
or upon representation of the City Treasurer or his deputy, award
such ownership, possession, or succession to any party to the action
upon payment to the court of the taxes with interest due on the pro-
perty and all other costs that may have accrued, subject to the final
outcome of the action.

SECTION 29. - TREASURER TO CERTIFY DELINQUENCIES REMAINING
UNCOLLECTED. The City Treasurer or his deputies shall prepare a
certified list of all real property tax delinquencies, which re-
main uncollected or for at least one (1) year in his jurisdiction,
and a statement of the reason or reasons for such non-collection
or non-payment, and shall submit the same to the Sangguniang Panlungsod
on or before December thirty-first (31st) of the year immediately
succeeding the year in which the delinquencies were incurred, with
a request for assistance in the enforcement of the remedies for
collection provided herein.

Continued on Page 17

--- [Page 17] ---
Resolution No. 10453,
Ordinance No. 5127,
Series of 1996, cont'd:
SECTION 30. - PERIODS WITHIN WHICH TO COLLECT REAL PROPERTY TAXES. - The basic real property tax and any other tax levied under this ordinance shall be collected within five (5) years from the date they become due. No action for the collection of tax, whether administrative or judicial, shall be instituted after the expiration of such period. In case of fraud or intent to evade payment of the tax, such action may be instituted for the collection of the same within ten (10) years from the discovery of such fraud or intent to evade payment.
The period of prescription within which to collect shall be suspended for the time during which:
1) The City Treasurer is legally prevented from collecting the tax;
2) The owner of the property or the person having legal interest therein requests for reinvestigation and executes a waiver in writing before the expiration of the period within to collect; and
3) The owner of the property or the person having legal interest, therein is out of the country or otherwise cannot be located.
ARTICLE V. DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS. - The proceeds of the basic real property tax, including interest thereon, and proceeds from the use, lease or disposition, sale or redemption of property acquired at a public auction in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, shall be distributed as follows: pursuant to Section 271 of the Local Government Code:
1) Seventy percent (70%) shall accrue to the general fund of the City.

--- [Page 18] ---
Page -18-
Resolution No. 10/26,
Ordinances No. 472,
Series of 1975, Cont'd:
2) Thirty percent (30%) shall be distributed among
the component Barangays of the City, in the
following manner:
i) Fifty percent (50%) shall accrue to
the barangay where the property is located;
ii) Fifty percent (50%) shall accrue equally to all the component barangays
of the City.
SECTION 52. APPLICATION OF PROCEEDS OF THE ADDITIONAL ONE
PERCENT SEF TAX. The proceeds from the additional one percent (%) tax on real property accruing to the Special Education Fund (SEF) shall be automatically released to the local school board, and shall be allocated for the operation and maintenance of public schools, construction and repair of school buildings, facilities and equipment, educational research, purchase of books and periodicals, and sports development as determined and approved by the Local School Board.
SECTION 53. PROCEEDS OF THE SPECIAL LEVY. The proceeds of the special levy on lands benefited by public works, projects and other improvements financed by the City Government shall accrue to the general fund of the City Government.
ARTICLE VI. BOARD OF ASSESSMENT APPEALS
SECTION 34. ORGANIZATION, POWERS, DUTIES, AND FUNCTIONS
OF CITY BOARD OF ASSESSMENT APPEALS.
a) The City Board of Assessment Appeals shall be composed of
the Register of Deeds of the city, as Chairman, the City Prosecutor and the City Engineer as members, who shall serve as such in an officio capacity without additional compensation.
b) The Chairman of the Board shall have the power to designate any employee of the City to serve as Secretary to the Board also without additional compensation.

--- [Page 19] ---
Page 15

Resolution No. 10456,
Ordinance No. 725,
Series of 1978 Cont'd 4;

c) The Chairman and members of the City Board of Assessment Appeals shall assume their respective positions without need of further appointment or special designation immediately upon effectiveness of this Code. They shall take an oath or affirmation of office in the manner herein set forth:

OATH OF OFFICE

I, _____________, after having been appointed to the position of ________________ in the City of Davao, and now assuming my position as _______________ of the City Board of Assessment Appeals, solemnly swear that I will faithfully discharge to the best of my ability the duties of this position and all of others that I am holding, or may hereafter hold, under the Republic of the Philippines, and that I will support and defend the Constitution of the Philippines, and that I will obey the laws, and legal orders promulgated by the duly constituted authorities of the Republic of the Philippines, and that I will well and truly hear and determine all matters and issues between taxpayers and the City Assessor submitted for my decision, and that I impose this obligation upon myself voluntarily, without reservation or purpose of evasion.

So help me God.

Signature

Subscribed and sworn to before me on this day of A.D. at ________________, Philippines.

Signature of Officer Administering Oath

SECTION 35. - Meetings and expenses of the Municipal Board of Assessment Appeals. (a) The City Board of Assessment Appeals shall Continued on Page 20.

--- [Page 20] ---
Page 20

Resolution No. 10428,
Ordinance No. 4722,
Series of 1996, cont'd:

meet once a month and as often as may be necessary for the prompt disposition of appealed cases. No member of the Board shall be entitled to per diems or traveling expenses for his attendance in Board meetings, except when conducting an ocular inspection in connection with under appeal.

b) All expenses of the Board shall be charged against the General Fund of the City. The San Juan County Planning Board shall appropriate the necessary funds to enable the Board to operate effectively.

SECTION 36. - FILING OF ASSESSMENT APPEALS. - Any owner or person having legal interest in the property who is not satisfied with the action of the City Assessor in the assessment of his property may, within sixty (60) days from the date of the receipt of the written notice of assessment, appeal to the City Board of Assessment Appeals by filing a petition under oath in the form prescribed for the purpose, together with copies of the tax declaration and such affidavits or documents submitted in support of the appeal.

SECTION 37. - ACTION BY THE CITY BOARD OF ASSESSMENT APPEALS. a) The Board shall decide the appeal within one hundred twenty (120) days from the date of receipt of such appeal. The Board, after hearing, shall render its decision based on substantial evidence or such relevant evidence on record as a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support the conclusion.

b) In the exercise of its appellate jurisdiction, the Board shall have the power to summon witnesses, administer oaths, conduct ocular inspections, take depositions, and issue subpoenas and sub- poenas duces tecum. The proceedings of the Board shall be conducted solely for the purpose of ascertaining the facts without necessarily adhering to technical rules of applicable judicial proceedings.

--- [Page 21] ---
Page -21-
Resolution No. 42-46,
Ordinance No. 4322,
Series of 1956, cont'd:41
o) The Secretary of the Board shall furnish the owner of the property or the person having legal interest therein and the City Assessor with a copy of the decision of the Board. In case the City Assessor concurs in the revision or the assessment, it shall be his duty to notify the owner of the property or the person having legal interest therein of such fact using the form prescribed for the purpose. The owner of the property or the person having legal interest therein or the assessor who is not satisfied with the decision of the Board may, within thirty (30) days after receipt of the decision of said Board, appeal to the Central Board of Assessment Appeals. The decision of the Central Board of Assessment Appeals shall be final and executory.
SECTION 36. EFFECT OF APPEAL ON THE PAYMENT OF REAL PROPERTY TAX. Appeal on assessments of real property made under the provisions of this Code shall, in no case, suspend the collection of the corresponding realty taxes on the property involved as assessed by the City Assessor, without prejudice to subsequent adjustment depending upon the final outcome of the appeal.
ARTICLE VIII - SPECIAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 39 - CONDONATION OR REDUCTION OF REAL PROPERTY TAX AND INTEREST. In case of a general failure of crops or substantial decrease in the price of agricultural or agri-based products, or calamity in the City, the Sangguniang Panlungsod, by ordinance passed prior to the first (1st) day of January of any year and upon recommendation of the Local Disaster Coordinating Council, may condon or reduce, wholly or partially, the taxes and interest for the succeeding years on the real properties affected by the above-described circumstances in the City.
Continued on Page -22-

--- [Page 22] ---
Page -22-
Resolution No. 10846;
Ordinance No. 4723;
Series of 1992, cont'd.;
SECTION 40. - CONDONATION OR REDUCTION OF TAX BY THE
PRESIDENT OF THE PHILIPPINES. - The President of the Philippines,
may, when public interest so requires, condone or reduce the real
property tax and interest for any year.
SECTION 41. - Duty of Registrar of Deeds and Notaries Public
To assist the City Assessor. - It shall be the duty of the Registrar
of Deeds and notaries public to furnish the City Assessor with copies
of all contracts selling, transferring, or otherwise conveying,
leasing, or mortgaging real property received by, or acknowledged
before them.
SECTION 42. - INSURANCE COMPANIES TO FURNISH INFORMATION.
Insurance companies are hereby required to furnish the City
Assessor copies of any contract or policy insurance on buildings,
structures, and improvements insured by them or such other documents
which may be necessary for the proper assessment thereof.
SECTION 43. - EXEMPTION FROM COURT FEES. - All court actions,
criminal or civil, instituted at the instance of the City Treasurer/
Assessor under this Ordinance, shall be exempt from the payment of
court and sheriff's fees.
SECTION 44. - FEES IN REGISTRATION OF PAPERS OR DOCUMENTS ON
SALE OF DELINQUENT REAL PROPERTY TO THE CITY. - All certificates,
documents and papers covering the sale of delinquent property to
the City, if registered in the Registry of Property, shall be exempt from the documentary stamp tax and registration fees.
SECTION 45. - EXEMPTION FROM POSTAL CHARGES. - All Real
property assessment notices or owner's copies of Tax Declarations
sent through the mails by the Assessor shall be exempt from the
payment of postal charges of fees.
SECTION 46. - SALE AND FORFEITURE BEFORE EFFECTIVITY OF
OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT CODE. - Tax delinquencies incurred, and
sales and forfeitures of delinquent real property, effected before

--- [Page 23] ---
Page -23-
Resolution No. 10246,
Ordinance No. 4123,
Series of 1995, Cont'd.,
the effectivity of the Local Government Code shall be governed by
the provisions of applicable laws then in force.
ARTICLE VIII. - FINAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 47. - PENALTY - For any violation of the provisions
of this Ordinance, a fine of not exceeding $5,000.00 and/or an
imprisonment of not more than one (1) year shall be imposed.
SECTION 48. - REPEALING CLAUSE - Section 1 of Ordinance No.
230, Series of 1991, as amended, and all other ordinances, rules
and regulations inconsistent herewith, are hereby repealed or modi-
fied accordingly.
SECTION 49. - SEPARABILITY CLAUSE - A judicial declaration
that a part hereof is unconstitutional or unlawful, shall not affect
the others which shall remain in full force and effect.
SECTION 50. - EFFECTIVITY - This Ordinance shall commence to
take effect upon approval, hereof.
ENACTED: July 19, 1996.
A vote of unanimity has been entered into the records.
APPROVED:
BENJAMIN L. DE GUZMAN
Vice Mayor II
Presiding Officer
ATTESTED:
Guillermo M. SALDANA
Sanggunian: Parlungsod
aba/essa
APPROVED:
RORICIO R. DUTERTE
City Mayor II
City of Davao
ATTESTED:
AMONIO V. A. LLAMAS
City Administrator