=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 0855-22 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
Republic of the Philippines
City of Davao
Office of the Sangguniang Panlungsod

19th City Council
2nd Regular Session
Series of 2022

PRESENT:
Councilor Alberto T. Ungab
- Temporary Presiding Officer
Councilor Ralph O. Abella
Councilor Nilo D. Abeliera
Councilor Maria Belen S. Acosta
Councilor Bai Hundra Cassandra Dominique N. Advincula
Councilor Wilberto E. Al-ag
Councilor Dante L. Apostol Sr.
Councilor Jose R. Bonguyan
Councilor Jessica M. Bonguyan
Councilor Louie John J. Bonguyan
Councilor Pilar C. Braga
Councilor Augusto Javier G. Campos III
Councilor Danilo C. Dayanghirang
Councilor Jonard C. Dayap
Councilor Edgar R. Bujayan Jr.
Councilor Edgar R. IbbatnSr.
Councilor Richlyn N. Justol-Baquilod
Councilor Pamela A. Librado-Morata
Councilor Diosdado Angelo Junior R. Mahipus
Councilor Rodolfo M. Mande
Councilor Jaffar U. Marohomsalic
Councilor Bonifacio E. Millat
Councilor Antonio D. Dacanlo-Ortiz
Councilor Antoinette G. Principe-Castrodes
Councilor J. Melchor B. Quitain Jr.
Councilor Mary Josella D. Villafuerte
Councilor Jesus Joseph P. Zozobraado III

ABSENT:
Vice Mayor Sebastian Z. Duterte
- OB Acting City Mayor

ORDINANCE NO. 0855-22
Series of 2022

AN ORDINANCE INSTITUTIONALIZING THE DAVAO CITY SUSTAINABLE LIVELIHOOD AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP PROGRAM (DCSLEP) AND INSTITUTING MECHANISM AS WELL AS APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREOF

--- [Page 2] ---
Page 2 of 6
Ord. No. 0855-22

Be it ordained by the Sangguniang Panlungsod of Davao City in session assembled, that:

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE - This Ordinance shall be known as the "Davao City Sustainable Livelihood and Entrepreneurship Program".

SECTION 2. DECLARATION OF POLICIES AND PRINCIPLES - It has been the policy of the Local Government of Davao City to ensure the viability and growth of Cooperatives and People's Organizations as instruments of social justice, equity, self-reliance, economic development, and people empowerment.

Republic Act No. 9178 or the Bangrang Micro Business Enterprises (BMBEs) Act of 2002 recognizes the role of BMBEs as essential driving forces for the country's economic development. The BMBEs are seedbeds of Filipino entrepreneurial talents and strengthening them would increase job generation, provide livelihood and better quality of life.

Republic Act No. 10744, otherwise known as the Credit Surety Fund Cooperative Act of 2015, aims to increase the credit worthiness of MSMEs which otherwise cannot obtain loans from banks due to lack of acceptable collateral, credit knowledge and credit track records. Said program complements the LGU's poverty alleviation programs by creating more economic activities and job opportunities, thus contributing to the revenues of the city.

The Bayanhan to Recover as Act 2 of 2020 (R.A. 11494) directs all National Government agencies (NGAs) such as the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI), Department of Science and Technology (DOST), Technical Education and Skills Development Authority (TESDA), Department of Agriculture (DA), Department of Environment and Natural Development (DENRD) and Department of Agrarian Reform (DAR) in consonance with their given mandate, are implementing Socio-economic Recovery Program such as Livelihood and Skills Training Program for their respective targeted beneficiaries particularly the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, especially those affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.

The City's thrust on poverty alleviation towards socio-economic development under its Socio-economic cluster spearheaded by the City Cooperative Development Office (CCDO) and departments such as the City Agriculturists' Office (CAO), City Veteranarian's Office (CVO) and the City Social Welfare Development Office (CSWDO) and other line offices through the Livelihood Assistance Program (LAP), have been providing financial assistance and livelihood projects and grants since 1999 through the passage of Administrative Order No. 2, Series of 1999; Executive Order No. 17, Series of 2005; and Executive Order No. 08, Series of 2009.

Under existing Executive Order No. 01, Series of 2015, an Order prescribing the Guidelines, Rules and Procedures Enhancing the Livelihood Assistance Program to be known as Enhanced Livelihood and Enterprise Assistance Program (ELEAP) of Davao City has to conform in accordance with Republic Act No. 11032, otherwise known as the "Ease of Doing Business and Efficient Government Service Delivery Act of 2018" which seeks to increase the efficiency of the delivery of government services, establish accountability and prevent graft and corruption in the government. Thus, ensuring timely and efficient delivery of services in the releases of financing assistance packages to targeted beneficiaries.

--- [Page 3] ---
Page 3 of 6
Ord. No. 0855-22

Therefore, the Ordinance institutionalizing the Davao City Sustainable Livelihood and Entrepreneurship Program (DSCLEP) is the City Government's vital and essential legislation for socio-economic reversals in line with the City's program thrust (Byaheng DO30) on poverty alleviation. Such can only be achieved by funding through equity infusion for the program and strengthen coordination and linkages with identified stakeholders in the government and private sector.

SECTION 3: DEFINITION OF TERMS, MAXIMUM AMOUNT OF LOAN, AND TERM OF THE LOAN - As used in this Ordinance, the following terms shall mean:

a) Cooperative Financial Assistance Program (CFAP) - is an expanded loan assistance program for cooperatives in terms of granting financial assistance in the amount of One Hundred Thousand Pesos (PHP100,000) to Three Hundred Thousand Pesos (PHP300,000) at zero percent (0%) interest rate for micro and small cooperatives; and from One Hundred Thousand Pesos (PHP100,000) to One Million Pesos (PHP1,000,000.00) at zero percent (0%) interest rate for medium and large cooperatives and a repayment period of two (2) years.

b) Cooperative Livelihood Development Program Start-up Capital Assistance (CLDP-SUCA) - is a community-based training and entrepreneurship platform which provides tech-vocational skills trainings implemented by CCDO intended for the poor, vulnerable, and marginalized households and communities, but not limited to, disadvantaged women, Indigenous Peoples (IPs), Persons with Disability (PWDs), Out/In of School Youth (I/OSY), Farmers and Fisherfolk, in order to improve their socio-economic conditions through provision of Start-up Capital of PHP100,000.00 - PHP20,000 payable in one (1) year at zero percent (0%) interest rate; and Working Capital of PHP30,000.00 - PHP50,000.00 with a repayment period of three (3) years at zero percent (0%) interest.

c) Self-Employment Assistance Program (SEAP) - is an integrated package of social welfare services project implemented by CSWDO, featuring a community-based credit assistance program utilizing people's organization as credit conduits. The target beneficiaries of this program are the low-income communities or barangays where the potential resources for entrepreneurial activity are present, such as, IP, I/OSY, farmers, organized youth, and persons with disabilities, which is geared towards the fundamental concept of self-reliance, self-management, and capability building with emphasis on sustainability through a cash loan of a minimum of PHP5,000 to a maximum of PHP10,000.00 payable from 12 to 24 months with zero interest.

d) Agricultural Development Program (AgBbH) - is a program implemented by the City Agriculturist's Office for organized and duly registered farmers and/or fisherfolk associations, Rural Improvement Clubs, 4-H Clubs, Cooperatives with agriculture and/or fishery related products/services from Davao City as beneficiaries and/or partners to ensure food security and accessibility through cash loan of a minimum of PHP50,000.00 and more than PHP30,000.00 without interest payable in 3 years.

e) Livestock Dispersal Program (LDP) - is a livelihood program implemented by CVO intended for individual farmers and POs as beneficiaries in order to increase their income through livestock dispersal scheme using improved upgraded strains of livestock and poultry production.

--- [Page 4] ---
Page 4 of 6

Ord. No. 0855-22

f) MSME GRANTS - is a financial assistance program coming from national and international fund sources allocated to the Local Government Unit to fund specific livelihood projects. The purpose of this program is to strengthen the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) in Davao City through the provision of equipment/material support and capability-building activity.

g) All other similar Livelihood Assistance Program from the National Government Agencies and other Non-Government Organizations that would support the City's thrust on poverty alleviation towards socio-economic development.

SECTION 4. ACKNOWLEDGING THE VARIOUS OFFICES AND DEPARTMENTS OF THE LGU AS INSTITUTIONALIZED OFFICES - Due to its long established programs since the year 1999 in the promotion of public interest, the City Cooperative Development Office (CCDO) and departments such as the City Agriculturist's Office (CAO), City Veterinarian's Office (CVO) and City Welfare Development Office (CWSDO) and other line offices through the Livelihood Assistance Program (LAP) are hereby acknowledged as institutionalized offices, thus, the aforementioned may grant loans to qualified beneficiaries through the Program Management Committee without prior approval and consideration of the City Mayor and the Sangguniang Panlungsod. However, the grant shall be subject to the availability of funds of the City Government and the other requirements imposed under this Ordinance, Its Implementing Rules and Regulations, and such other applicable laws.

SECTION 5. PROGRAM MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE (PMC) - Pursuant to this Ordinance, the Program Management Committee shall be the authorized signatories in any contract, deed, agreement, or other documents necessary to facilitate and formalize the loan granted under this Ordinance.

For this purpose, PMC is hereby authorized to represent the City in all related transactions and sign, for and in behalf of the City Government of Davao in any contract, deed, agreement or other documents necessary to facilitate and formalize the loan granted under this Ordinance.

In view thereof, there is hereby created a Program Management Committee (PMC) composed of:

Chairperson: The City Mayor
Vice Chairperson: Chairperson, S.P., Committee on Cooperatives and People's Participation
Members: Head, City Cooperative Development Office
Head, City Agriculturist's Office
Head, City Veterinarian's Office
Head, City Social Welfare and Development Office
Head, IEDD - City Mayor Office
Secretariat: City Cooperative Development Office (CCDO)

The Program Management Committee (PMC) shall perform the following functions:

1. Oversee the overall operation, implementation and evaluation of the Davao City Sustainable Livelihood and Entrepreneurial Program;

--- [Page 5] ---
Page 5 of 6
Ord. No. 0855-22

2. Formulate and Institute policies and procedures not covered by the said Ordinance that prescribe the guidelines, rules and procedures in the Implementation of the various Livelihood Programs implemented by each Department as contained in this Ordinance;

3. Approval of all loans from various departments as contained in this Ordinance and sign Loan Agreement (LA) and all instrumentalities as needed thereof;

4. Institute safety measures in the regulation of the trust fund accounts;

5. Grant condonation and/or amnesty to the beneficiaries in times of fortuitous event or force majeure that renders the repayment of the beneficiary impossible;

6. Cooperate and collaborate partnerships and networking with international, national and local government and funding agencies as well as non-government and private sector organizations in support of the program;

7. Provide alternative access to funds that will help target beneficiaries to start, sustain and expand their socio-economic enterprise; and

8. Create a DCSLEP Technical Working Group (TWG) responsible for the evaluation and monitoring of all livelihood programs as contained in this Ordinance composed of various departments implementing said programs and other Departments such as the City Budget Office (CBO), City Accounting Office (CAO), City Treasurer's Office (CTO) and City Legal Office (CLO) for this matter.

Section 6. FUNDING AND OPERATIONAL EXPENSES: Funding for the implementation of the Davao City Sustainable Livelihood and Entrepreneurship Program (DCSLEP) shall be sourced out from the budgetary appropriations as already provided, including those that would be provided in the Development Fund of the City Government of Davao.

Section 7. CREATION OF TRUST FUND: There is hereby created a Trust Fund, which shall be managed, utilized, and accounted for by the Institutionalized Offices aforementioned and in a manner provided for in this Ordinance. The Trust Fund is separate and distinct from the regular funds appropriated through the Annual Budgetary Appropriations.

All collections from Loan and Livelihood Assistance Program as implemented by CCDO, CSWD, CVO, and Cagro, even prior to the effectivity of this Ordinance, shall accrue to the separate and distinct TRUST FUND accounts of the said offices created for that purpose.

Accordingly, the disbursement of the Trust Fund by the respective offices shall only be made pursuant to the spirit and intention of the Davao City Sustainable Livelihood and Entrepreneurship Program (DCSLEP) and in accordance with the procedures that will be passed by PMC.

Section 8. REPORTORIAL REQUIREMENT: Before the end of December of each year, the Institutionalized Offices through IMC shall submit an annual report to the Sangguniang Panlungsod regarding the status of the Trust Fund particularly relating to its financial condition, operation, collection, and movement of the monies therein.

--- [Page 6] ---
Page 6 of 6
Ord. No. 0855-22

The PMC shall publish another version of the annual report in terms understandable to the layman.

SECTION 9. SEPARABILITITY CLAUSE— If any provision of this Ordinance or part thereof is held invalid or unconstitutional, the remainder of the law or the provision not otherwise affected shall remain valid and subsisting.

SECTION 5. EFFECTIVITY — This Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon approval.

ENACTED, January 11, 2022, by an unanimous vote of all the Members of the Sanggunian, there being a quorum.

CERTIFIED CORRECT:

Charito N. Santos
Secretary to the Sanggunian Panlungsod (City Government Department Head II)

ATTESTED:
Alberto D. Ungab
Acting Vice Mayor
Temporary Presiding Officer

APPROVED: FEB. 24, 2022

Sara Z. Duterte
City Mayor

SEBASTIAN Z. DUTERTE
Acting City Mayor

ATTESTED:
Atty. Zuleika T. Lopez
City Administrator
