=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 000281-72 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
5th City Council of Davao
91st Regular Session
Series of 1972
Republic of the Philippines
CITY OF DAVAO
Office of the City Council
ORDINANCE NO. 281
ZONIFICATION ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF DAVAO.
Be it Ordained by the City Council, City of Davao, that:
ANNULE 1. - TITLE OF THE ORDINANCE. - This Ordinance shall be known as the "ZONIFICATION ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF DAVAO".
ANNULE 2. - THE ZONIFICATION PLAN. - For the purpose of this Ordinance, the Expanded Zonification Plan for the City of Davao together with all the explanatory matters thereon is hereby approved and adopted as the Official Zoning Map, wherein the different zones are delimited into, namely: Residential Zones Class "A" and Class "B", Commercial Zone, Light-Non-Offensive Industrial Zone, Heavy and/or Offensive Industrial Zone, and Open Space Zone.
The Official Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor attested to by the City Engineer, and bearing the seal of the City of Davao under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the Official Zoning Map referred to in Ordinance No. 281, series of 1972.
Changes shall be entered on the Official Zoning Map promptly after the amendment is passed by the City Council and approved by the City Mayor, with an entry on the Official Zoning Map as follows: "On December 8, 1973, under Ordinance No. 281, series of 1972, the following date changes were made in the Official Zoning Map (brief description of nature of change(s))", which entry shall be signed by the City Engineer (and attested to by the Chief, Division of Zonification and Planning). Approved amendments to this ordinance shall be indicated on the Official Zoning Map by the City Engineer within three (3) days from receipt thereof.
No changes of any nature shall be made in the Official Zoning

--- [Page 2] ---
-2-
Ordinance No. 291, series of 1972, continued:
Nap on matters shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this ordinance.
Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the Official Zoning Map which may from time to time be made or published, the Official Zoning Map in a tracing paper or cloth which shall be located in the Office of the City Engineer, shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land and water areas, buildings, and other structures in the City.
At the beginning of every fiscal year, the City Engineer shall furnish an up-dated copy of the Official Zoning Map to the City Mayor and the City Council for their file and reference.
ARTICLE 3. - FIXING THE BOUNDARIES OF THE UNSEENVESTED AND/OR UNDERSIZED AREAS. - For the areas where there are yet no existing roads or fixed monuments that will aid in the fixing of boundaries, the City Engineer shall undertake the necessary survey and detailed planning for the purpose, following as much as practicable the lines as indicated in the Official Zoning Map.
ARTICLE 4. - RULES FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF ZONING BOUNDARIES. - Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of zones as shown on the Official Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
1. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such center lines;
2. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as following such lot lines;
5. Boundaries indicated as approximately following city limits shall be construed as following such city limits;
4. Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be construed to follow such shore lines, and in the event of change in the shore lines, shall be construed as moving with the actual shore lines;

--- [Page 3] ---
-3-
Ordinance No. 261, series of 1972, continued;
boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines
of streams, rivers, canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall
be construed to follow such center lines;
Boundaries indicated as parallel to, or extensions of, features
indicated not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning Map shall
be determined by the scale of the map;
5. Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground
are at variance with those shown on the Official Zoning Map, or in
other circumstances not covered by subsections 1 through 5 above, the
City Engineer shall interpret the zone boundaries.
6. Where a zone boundary line divides a lot which was in
single ownership at the time of passage of this ordinance, the
City Engineer may permit, as a special exception, the extension of
the regulations for either portion of the lot not to exceed thirty (30)
meters beyond the zone line into the remaining portion of the lot.
ARTICLE 5. - RESIDENTIAL ZONE CLASS "A". - Only the following
buildings and structures shall be permitted to be constructed or
erected within the Residential Zone Class "A".
1. Single family detached dwellings
2. Two family dwellings
3. Churches and other buildings for worship
4. Public or Private Schools, Colleges and Universities
5. Apartments, not more than two stories high
6. Public and semi-public institutions
a) District Halls
b) Community or Neighborhood Centers
c) Service Centers
d) Health and welfare centers
e) Maternity Hospitals
f) Museums
Continued on Page 4-

--- [Page 4] ---
-4-
Ordinances No. 281, series of 1972, continued:
g) Libraries
h) Police Stations
i) Fire Stations
j) Electric and Telephone Exchanges
k) Cockpits
7. Dormitories, not more than two stories
8. Gardens and Plants Nurseries
9. First Class Hotels
10. Restaurants and Refreshment Parlors
11. Customary incidental home occupation, such as dressmaking, tailoring, beauty shop, flower shop conducted within a dwelling and no retail business of any sort is involved.
12. Gasoline Stations, under the following conditions:
1. Only buildings or structures of reinforced concrete which will enhance the beautification of the City shall be allowed. The building and/or structure shall be beautifully painted;
2. The driveway to the gasoline filling station and other necessary parts of its premises shall be paved with concrete to preclude the muddy and unsightly condition of its premises; and
3. The premises of the station shall always be kept clean and beautiful, free from any accumulation of mud and earth.
No domestic animals, except dogs, cats, birds and fowls shall be permitted to be kept in this zone.
ARTICLE 6. - RESIDENTIAL ZONE CLASS "B". - With the exceptions Continued on Page 5-

--- [Page 5] ---
-5-
Ordinance No. 261, series of 1972, continued.
of the following buildings or structures and businesses, no other
buildings or structures or businesses shall be permitted to be cons-
tructed or erected or established within the Residential Zone
Class "B".
1. All buildings or structures permitted within Resi-
dential Zone Class "B".
2. Multi-family dwellings
3. Apartment houses
4. Hotels
5. Offices with no actual display, sale, transfer or
handling of commodities in the premises
6. Vocational Schools
7. Boarding Houses and Dormitories
8. Orphanages, home for the aged
9. Hospitals, except those for animals, for insane and
for contagious diseases
10. Custodial incidental house occupation such as barber
shop, small salo-salo store, retail drug store and
other custodial incidental house occupations, pro-
vided that no mechanical equipment is used, except
such as permissible for purely domestic or household
purposes.
II. Dry cleaning and laundries with machinery of not more
than 1/2 horse power.
ARTICLE 7. - Commercial Zone. With the exception of the
following buildings or structures and businesses, no other buildings,
or structures and business shall be permitted to be constructed or
erected or established within the Commercial Zone:
1. All buildings or structures permitted in Residential
Zone Class "B"
Continued on Page 6-

--- [Page 6] ---
Ordinance No. 261, series of 1972, continued:
2. Markets
3. Bakeries
4. Dry goods and grocery stores
5. Office Buildings
6. Commercial Garages
7. Light-Non-Offensive Industries clearly incidental to a retail business with a electrical machinery not exceeding five (5) horse power
8. Funeral parlors
9. Pool and Billiard Halls
10. Printing shops and newspaper publishing
11. Manufacture of shoes for retail only and shoe repair shops
12. Bowling alleys
13. Bars and n.jit clubs, subject to provisions of R.A. 1224
14. Cold storage
15. Hat factories
16. Ice Cream and Ice Drop factories
17. Cinemas and Theaters
18. Hotels
19. Storehouses or small scale warehouse incidental to retail business
20. Sales and service of electrical appliances
21. Sales and service of M/h mechanical equipment
22. Candy factories
23. Tire recomping plants, repair of electrical and mechanical equipment, when established behind their respective business establishments along N/Arthur Avenue, Jone P. Laurel, Rustico Cabagual Avenue and Lapa-Lapu Street Extension

--- [Page 7] ---
-7-
Ordinance No. 281, series of 1973, continued:
24. Sales and service of Office equipment
ARTICLE 6. - LIGHT-NON-OFFENSIVE INDUSTRIAL ZONE. - Only the following buildings or structures and business shall be permitted to be constructed or erected and established within the Light-non-offensive industrial zone:
1. All buildings or structures and business allowed within Commercial Zone
2. Shirt, shoe factories
3. Steam laundries
4. Bottling works for soft drinks
5. Warehouse and storeroom house provided they are not offensive
6. Marbleworks
7. Cigar and cigarette factories
8. Manufacture of drugs and medicines
9. Machine shop
10. Food preserving and canning
11. Mattress factories
12. Factories for iron works products such as grills, fences, steel chairs, household tools and similar articles
13. Motor vehicles repair shops
14. Factories for the processing of oil and allied products such as paraffin, lard, margarine, soap, pomade, etc.
15. Coffee factories
16. Woodworking establishments such as carpentry shop, furniture shop, sawmill factory, and toy factory
17. Lumber yard
18. Ice plants and cold storage
19. Continued on Page 8
no. 5/8, series 1943.

--- [Page 8] ---
-8-
Ordinance No. 261, series of 1972, continued:
ARTICLE 9. - HEAVY AND/OR OFFENSIVE INDUSTRIAL ZONE. - Only the following buildings or structures and businesses shall be permitted to be constructed or erected and established within the heavy and/or offensive industrial zone:
1. Sawmills
2. Rice and other grain mills
3. Textile factories
4. Nail and screw factories
5. Match factories
6. Distilleries and breweries
7. Factories for the processing of sugar such as sugar mills and refineries and extraction of molasses
8. Toyo, bijon, and toloa factories
9. Bituminous products establishment such as crosote treatment plants and asphalt mixing plants
10. Fertilizer plants
11. Glue and gelatine plants
12. Paint, oil, shellac, turpentine, alcohol and varnish factories
13. Dye and lye manufacturing plants
14. Turneries
15. Glass and bottle factories
16. Factories for the manufacture of cement, lime, gypsum
17. Factories for the manufacture of bricks, tiles, potteries, ceramics and similar products
18. Concrete block factories and concrete mixing plants
19. Rope factories
20. Acetylene and other gas manufacturing plants

--- [Page 9] ---
Ordinance No. 281, series of 1972, continued:

21. Veneer and plywood factories
22. Plants for the manufacture and storage of carbide
23. Blast furnace
24. Boiler works
25. Iron, steel, brass, copper and aluminum smelting plants and establishments
26. Factories for the processing of lead and samu-
    -facture of lead products
27. Sheet metal works
28. Kiln drying
29. Caustic soda and soda ash factories
30. Poultry and other animals feed factories
31. Electric bulbs and fluorescent light factories
32. Motor vehicles assembly plants
33. Petroleum refineries and storage
34. Acid manufacturing plants
35. Armaments
36. Plants for the manufacture and storage of explosives
37. Slaughter houses and abattoirs

ANNEXURE 10. - OPEN SPACE ZONES. - Only the following uses of land shall be permitted to be developed and established with the open space zones:
1. Parks and playgrounds
2. Beach resort
3. Camp site
4. Cultural site
5. Golf site
6. Cemetery and memorial park
7. Agricultural uses excluding poultry and animal raising

--- [Page 10] ---
-10-
Ordinance No. 281, series of 1972, continued:
6. Botanical and zoological gardens
9. Buildings incidental to the function of the open space
ARTICLE 11. - NEW INDUSTRIES AID/OR BUSINESS. - The location of any building or structures of business not mentioned herein, in any of the established industrial or commercial zones shall be determined by the City Council.
ARTICLE 12. - CONSTRUCTION IN UNZONIFIED AREAS. - The buildings or structures and business mentioned in Article 9 shall not be permitted to be constructed or erected and established in the Unzoned Areas or outside the approved development and zonification plan for the City without the prior approval of the City Council.
ARTICLE 13. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT, PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF ZONING COMPLIANCE.
1. Administration and Enforcement. - The City Engineer shall administer and enforce this ordinance.
If the City Engineer shall find that any of the provisions of this ordinance are being violated, he shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He shall order discontinuance of illegal buildings or structures or illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this ordinance to ensure compliance with, or to prevent violation of, the provisions of this ordinance.
2. Building Permit Required. - No building, or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered without a permit therefor. No building permit shall be issued by the City Engineer except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance.
3. Application for Building Permit. - All applications for Continued on Page -11-

--- [Page 11] ---
-11-
Ordinance No. 281, series of 1972, continued:
building permits shall be accompanied by plans in quintuplicate drawn to scale, showing the actual size and location of the lot to be built upon; the exact dimension, shape and location of the building already existing and those proposed to be built or altered. The application shall also include such other information as may be required by the City Engineer for the proper enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance.
4. No Certificate of Occupancy required under the Revised Building Ordinance shall be issued by the City Engineer except in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance.
5. Business Permits and/or licenses. - No business permits and/or licenses shall be granted any business or establishment so situated or established in violation of the provisions of this ordinance.
ARTICLE 14. - GENERAL REGULATIONS. - All existing buildings or structures and business establishments legally authorized under previous ordinances and regulations which do not conform with this Ordinance at the time of its adoption may be allowed to continue for a period of Five (5) years from the approval of this ordinance, provided: a) That no such non-conforming use shall be enlarged or increased, or extended to occupy a greater area of land than that already occupied by such use at the time of the approval of this ordinance;
b) If any such non-conforming use of land ceases for any reason for a period of more than thirty (30) days, any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the provisions of this ordinance for the zone which such land is located;
c) That any non-conforming structure, or group of non-conforming structures related to one use and under one ownership, which have been damaged by fire, flood, explosion, earthquakes, war, Continued on Page -12-

--- [Page 12] ---
-12-
Ordinance No. 291, series of 1972, continued:
riot, or other "force majeure," may be reconstructed and used as
before, provided that such reconstruction is done within twelve (12)
months from the date of such damage, and provided further, that the
extent of the damage is not more than fifty per cent (50%) of the
assessed value of the structure or structures.
d) That the total structural repair and alteration that may be made in a non-conforming structure shall not, during its remaining life subsequent to the approval of this Ordinance, exceed twenty five per cent (25%) of its assessed value.
e) That no such non-conforming use shall be changed to another
non-conforming use.
ARTICLE 15. - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES. - The owner of any building or structure so constructed, or business or industries established, in violation of the provisions of this Ordinance, or any person who shall violate any of its provisions, or fail to comply therewith, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than Fifty Pesos ($50.00) and not more than Two Hundred Pesos ($200.00) or by imprisonment of not less than Thirty (30) days and not more than Six (6) months, or by both fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court.
Provided, however, that in case the owner of the building or structure so constructed in violation of the provisions of this Ordinance is found guilty by competent Court, the City Engineer with the approval of the City Mayor is empowered to order the owner to this building or structure illegally constructed to remove same within Three (3) months, and in case he fails to do so, the City Engineer is empowered to cause removal or demolition of this building or structure at the expense of the owner.
Provided, also that the owner of the business or industry established in violation of this Ordinance shall upon conviction be Continued on Page -12-

--- [Page 13] ---
-13-
Ordinance No. 201, series of 1972, continued.
ordered by the City Mayor to close the business or industry, and any further operation or activity of the business shall constitute a new and separate offense which shall be penalized by a fine of two hundred Pesos (200.00) and by imprisonment of six (6) months.
ARTICLE 16. - REPEALING CLAUSE. - Ordinance No. 70, series of 1947 as amended, is hereby repealed. The provisions of other existing ordinances or regulations, or parts thereof, that are in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance, are hereby likewise repealed.
ARTICLE 17. - SEPARABILITY CLAUSE. - Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by a Court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of this Ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof, other than that part so declared to be invalid or unconstitutional.
ARTICLE 18. - EFFECTIVENESS. - This Ordinance shall take effect upon its approval.
ENACTED: December 8, 1972.
COCHISELLO F. MACHADO
Vice Mayor
Presiding Officer
SCHIZZO C. IACHIRILLA
Secretary of the Council
APPROVED:
1972
