=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 000298-09 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
Republic of the Philippines
OFFICE OF THE CITY LEGAL OFFICER
City of Davao
RECEIVED
DEC 7, 9 2009
DECEMBER 28, 2009
Respectfully forwarded to the Office of the City Mayor, through the
Office of the City Administrator, both this City, the subject Ordinance No.
0296-9 Series of 2009 ENTITLED "AN ORDINANCE FOR THE PROPER
HARVESTING, STORAGE AND UTILIZATION OF RAINWATER IN DAVAO CITY,
with the herein findings and observation:
Section 6 which mandates the inclusion of RCS in all new
commercial and industrial buildings including major renovation and
expansion of existing public and private buildings is Vague. It is vage for
the ordinance fails to set the minimum standard on what and how it be
compiled.
The Supreme Court, in the case of People vs Nazario, 165 SCRA 187
held that as a rule, a statute or act may be said to be vague when it lacks
comprehensible standard that men of common intelligence must
necessarily guess at its meaning and differ as to its application. It is
repugnant to the Constitution in two respects: (1) it violates due process for
failure to accord persons, specially the parties targeted by it, fair notice of
the conduct to avoid; (2) it leaves enforcers unbridled discretion and
becomes an arbitrary flexing of the Government muscle.
Section 14, which states that "The putting up of RCS shall be a mandatory
requirement in the issuance of a new building permit. The City Engineer's Office shall prepare guidelines on the classification of buildings according to type of occupancy which shall be required to put up RCS with corresponding capacities," is Vague and Improper.
The classification of building which shall be required to put RCS is a
matter of legislative policy and cannot be delegated to the hands of the
executive department without requiring express standard to guide. In the
absence of standard, by which the acts can be measured or controlled, the
delegate could exercise absolute, unregulated, undefined discretion.
The Supreme Court, in the case of Solicitor General vs Metropolitan Manila Authority, 204 SCRA 837 has held that there is a valid
delegation of legislative power to promulgate such measure, provided that
the following requisites are present: (1) the completeness of the
statute making the delegation; and (2) the presence of a sufficient
standard.
Under the first, the statute must leave in the hands of the legislature
complete in all its terms and provisions such that all the delegators
have to do when the statute reaches it to implement it. What
delegated is not the discretion when the law shall be to determine how the law shall be enforced. As the second requirement is the

--- [Page 2] ---
enforcement may be effected only in accordance with a sufficient standard, the function of which is to map out the boundaries of the delegatee's authority and thus prevent the delegation from running riot.
Sections 24, 25 and 26 are absurd if not meaningless provisions. As noted, the same cannot be implemented even with the passage of this ordinance in view of the fact that the guidelines need to be approved by the legislative department. It would have been a different story if the legislators had laid the policy for the implementation of the executive department.
In view thereof, VETO of the ordinance is hereby recommended.
ATTY. MARIA A. GALLO, RSW Legal Officer 1V
This is to certify that this legal opinion was arrived at personally by the undersigned based on the facts and issues presented/submitted in relation to applicable laws and jurisprudence.
ATTY. MARILIA A. GALLO, RSW
Approved:
OSMUNDO F. MILANUEVA, JR
Acting Agt.
Ofy Legal Officer
Date of Approval: December 28 2009
Date received by the Office: December 21, 2009
Date received by the lawyer: December 23, 2009

--- [Page 3] ---
15th City Council
39th Regular Session
Series of 2009

Republika ng Pilipinas
SARGUENIANG PANLUNGOSOD
Lungsod ng Davao

PRESENT:
Councillor Ma. Belen S. Acosta - Acting Vice Mayor
Councillor Nilo G. Abellera
Councillor Victorio S. Adunclula Sr.
Councillor Dante L. Apostol Jr.
Councillor Leonardo R. Avila III
Councillor Conrado C. Baluran
Councillor Karlo S. Edillo
Councillor Jose P. Bongayan
Councillor Plar C. Braga
Councillor Arnoldo Ricardo B. Cabiling
Councillor Damlo C. Dayanghiran
Councillor Edgar R. Buyan
Councillor Peter T. Lavina
Councillor Diosdado Angelico A. Malibius Sr.
Councillor Tomas M. DelaMarina
Councillor Tomas J. Monteverde IV
Councillor Myrna G. L' Dalode-Oritz
Councillor Susan Isabel C. Reta
Councillor Angela Librada-Trinidad
Councillor Jose Louie P. Villanuerte
Councillor Rachel P. Zozobra

ON OFFICIAL BUSINESS:
Vice Mayor Sara Z. Duterte - Acting City Mayor
Councillor Hallia Y. Sudagar

ABSENT:
Councillor Wilberto E. Al-ag
Councillor Samuel B. Bangoy
Councillor Paulo Z. Duterte
Councillor Bonifacio E. Malitir

ORDINANCE NO. 0298-09
Series of 2009

AN ORDINANCE FOR THE PROPER
HARVESTING, STORAGE AND UTILIZATION
OF RAINWATER IN DAVAO CITY

Be it ordained by the Sangguniang Panlungsod of Davao City in
session assembled that:

--- [Page 4] ---
Page 2 of 10
Ord. No. 0298-09

ARTICLE I
TITLE OF THE ORDINANCE

Section 1. Short Title - This Ordinance shall be known as the "Davao City Rainwater Ordinance of 2009".

ARTICLE II
DECLARATION OF POLICY

Section 2. Declaration of Policy - It is hereby declared that the policy of Davao City that sustainable development shall be pursued within the context of a balanced ecology through the proper use of natural resources giving due consideration to the protection and conservation of the environment and adapt to the impacts of climate change. Towards this end, the City shall:

a) Promote the proper harvesting, storage and utilization of rainwater as a viable alternative source of water supply primarily for non-potable use including domestic usage for flushing of toilets, general cleaning, washing of clothes, urban agriculture, landscape irrigation and supplement water sources for industrial, commercial, institutional, agricultural usage;

b) Promote the proper harvesting, storage and utilization of rainwater to reduce the effects of storm water peak flow and surface runoff and situation that will contribute in the reduction or mitigation of flooding and reduction of erosion of canals and deposit of silt loads on local roads and non-point source pollution in urban areas;

c) Encourage and support the adoption and development of appropriate technology related to rainwater utilization by medium to large size commercial, institutional and industrial establishments including medium to high-end residential subdivisions which are primarily consuming high volume of freshwater;

d) Enact and enforce policies towards the promotion of the proper harvesting, storage and use of rainwater.

ARTICLE III
DEFINITION OF TERMS

Section 3. Definition of Terms - As used in this Ordinance, the following terms are defined as follows:

--- [Page 5] ---
Page 3 of 10
Ord. No. 0298-09

a) Agricultural Plantations - refers to agricultural farm planting for commercial purposes;
b) Catchment surface - the collection surface from which rainfall runs off;
c) Cluster-type Rainwater Catchment System (RCS) - type of structure that would serve as the common system for a group of persons;
d) Commercial and industrial establishments - private buildings like malls, hotels, factory plantations and the like;
e) Communal-type or cluster-type of Rainwater Catchment System (RCS) - type of structure that serve as the common system for a community;
f) Filter - is the act of removing dirt or any matter suspended in the water by passing it through a porous article or mass;
g) Gutters and downspout - to channel water from the roof to the tank;
h) Leaf screens, first flush diverters and roof washers - components of the treatment and disinfection subsystem of the rainwater harvesting system which will remove debris and dust from the captured rainwater before it goes to the tank;
i) Private Buildings - refer to structures which are not owned by the government;
j) Public Buildings - refer to structures owned by either the local or the national government, including those owned by Government-Owned and Controlled Corporations (GOCCs) with or without original charters;
k) Rain or rainwater - drops of freshwater that falls as precipitation from clouds or a type of precipitation as a product of the condensation of atmospheric water vapor that is released on the earth's surface;

l) Rainwater Catchment Systems (RCS) - comprise the structure and the process of maintaining the system. The structure consists of the catchment area (roof, platform, ground, or any surface identified), the conveyance (gutter pipes, etc.) and the cistern (storage or tank). The processes for maintaining the system includes accessories and procedures for maintaining water quality, process to determine water adequacy and special

--- [Page 6] ---
Page 4 of 10
Ord. No. 0298-09

processes which include, but not limited to, multi-storey, mix
system, multi-use design and processes;

m) Rainwater harvesting - is simply defined as proper capture of
rain water, storage and use;
n) Sewerage - refers to the removal of surface water and water
matter by sewers;
o) Sewers - refers to a pipe or drain, usually underground used to
carry off water and waste matter;
p) Storage tanks or cistern - the container where the harvested
rainwater is stored;
q) Tax Rebates - refers to a reduction in taxes or tax credits that
may be granted to qualified persons or entities for complying
with the RCS requirements.

ARTICLE IV
RAINWATER CATCHMENT SYSTEM

Section 4. Basic Components of Rainwater Catchment System
(RCS) - A Rainwater Catchment System (RCS) is composed of five basic
components, namely: collection system (catchment surface), conveyance
system (gutters and downspout), storage system (storage tanks),
treatment and disinfection system (leaf screen, first flush diverters, roof
washing), and drainage/sewerage system (rainwater and storm water
drains);

Section 5. Classification - Rainwater harvesting system in Davao City is classified based on the size and nature of catchment surface and
based on whether the systems are urban and rural settings, as follows:

a) Small size RCS of individual residential and other types of
buildings with a catchment surface equal to or less than fifty
[50] square meters;

b) Medium to large size RCS of residential buildings including
commercial, institutional, industrial, and agricultural
establishments with a catchment surface greater than fifty [50]
square meters;

c) RCS for apartments, duplex or multi-storey buildings in
urbanized areas;

d) RCS with pervious or impervious catchment surfaces;

--- [Page 7] ---
Page 5 of 10
Ord. No. 0298-09

Section 6. RCS in Public and Private Buildings - All construction of new commercial and industrial buildings including major renovations and expansions of existing public and private buildings must include an RCS.

RCS must be integrated into existing government buildings, especially public schools and public markets. Owners of other existing buildings are encouraged to install RCS.

Section 7. RCS in Residential Buildings - The developers and owners, including the homeowner's associations, of new residential building units may install a communal or cluster type RCS.

Owners of existing residential building units are encouraged to set up their own RCS upon the effectiveness of this ordinance.

Section 8. RCS in Agricultural Plantations - RCS or small water impounding systems (SWIS) shall be integrated into newly-established agricultural plantations. RCS or SWIS are encouraged to be built in existing plantations from the effectiveness of this ordinance.

Section 9. Other Priority Farms - The Office of the City Agriculturist shall identify priority farms in the agriculture sector, other than agricultural plantations, which shall be also encouraged to put-up RCS or Small Water Impounding System (SWIS), whichever is appropriate.

ARTICLE V
MULTIPLE USES OF HARVESTED RAINWATER

Section 10. General Statement on Multiple Utilization of Harvested Rainwater:

a. To conserve water as well as energy, harvested rainwater stored in tanks and cisterns should be used as additional water for non-health purposes such as for toilet flushing, general cleaning, gardening, laundry, car washing, fire fighting, and construction. Use of such stored water for drinking should be with much caution. The Department of Health (DOH) should be the final authority on the water quality tests needed to warrant the potability of the stored water;

b. To reduce run off and flooding in sealed ground surfaces, proprietors of such areas must have rainwater drainage/catchment systems that should recycle the run off and not create nuisance in other places;

--- [Page 8] ---
Page 6 of 10
Ord. No. 0298-09

c. To increase the holdback capacity of water, reduce run off and soil erosion, contain effluents, as well as augment farm water supply, agricultural areas must have ground basins or structures that should catch rainwater.

Section 11. Non-potable use - The harvested rain primarily in residential, commercial, industrial, institutional establishments and agricultural farms shall be used for flushing of toilets, general cleaning, washing of clothes and landscape irrigation;

Section 12. Urban and Rural Agriculture, Backyard and Commercial Animal Raising - Significant volume of water harvested from the rain can supply the water requirement for sanitation and general cleaning of urban and rural agriculture, backyard, commercial animal raising and crop production.

Section 13. Potable Use - Unless adequately treated, filtered or boiled, harvested rainwater shall not be used for drinking. The City Health Office or the Department of Health or its accredited laboratories should be the recognized entities for water quality tests needed to warrant potability of the stored rainwater;

ARTICLE VI
MANDATORY PROVISION OF RCS

Section 14. RCS as a Requirement in the Issuance of Building Permit from the City Engineers Office - The putting up of a RCS shall be a mandatory requirement in the issuance of a new building permit. The City Engineer's Office shall prepare guidelines on the classification of buildings according to type of occupancy which shall be required to put-up RCS with corresponding capacities;

ARTICLE VII
MANDATORY DESIGN OF RAINWATER HARVESTING AND FLOOD CONTROL SYSTEMS IN URBAN AREAS

Section 15. Design Integration of the Proper Harvesting Storage and Utilization of Rainwater - The proper harvesting, storage and utilization of rainwater shall be integrated with the proper design, construction and maintenance of drainage systems that will imitate the natural hydrology of the developed site;

Section 16. Design Integration for Roads, Open Air Parking Areas, Recreational and Sports Facilities Including Later Open Areas on Establishments - Previous and impervious surfaces including later open areas on parking area, recreational and sports facilities including later open areas on institutions or establishments especially in urbanized areas shall be

--- [Page 9] ---
Page 7 of 10
Ord. No. 0298-09

designed to catch rainwater which will reduce stormwater peak flow and surface runoff that will contribute to the reduction or mitigation of local flooding and erosion of canals and enhance the quality of surface water in urban areas;

ARTICLE VIII
THE WATERSHED MANAGEMENT COUNCIL, AS THE IMPLEMENTING AGENCY OF THE DAVAO CITY RAINWATER ORDINANCE OF 2009

Section 17. The Watershed Management Council - The Watershed Management Council, created by virtue of Ordinance No. 0310-07, Series of 2007, otherwise known as the "The Watershed Code," shall be the primary implementing body of this ordinance considering that rainwater harvesting is a component of the entire watershed management conservation effort.

Section 18. Secretariat Support - To assist the Watershed Management Council, the secretariat support shall be provided by the City Engineer's Office;

Section 19. Technical Assistance Services - The Watershed Management Council shall provide technical assistance/services to households, commercial and industrial establishments and institutions in complying with the provisions of the ordinance;

Section 20. Simplified Technical Manual - The Watershed Management Council shall formulate a simplified technical manual on planning and development of rainwater harvesting systems which include the design, construction, operation and maintenance of the RCS, water quality testing and treatment, water balance, system sizing, rainwater harvesting guidelines and cost estimation;

Section 21. Comprehensive Rainwater Management Information and Education - The Watershed Management Council shall adopt strategies that will extensively promote and advocate rainwater harvesting particularly providing a comprehensive information and education on the advantages and benefits of rainwater harvesting;

Section 22. Research and Development - The Watershed Management Council shall collaborate with the academic, professional organizations, and other entities in the research and development of appropriate technology in harvesting rainwater for all types of ECS;

Section 23. Media Campaign on Rainwater Education - In partnership with the Davao City Information Office and the various media organizations, the Watershed Management Council shall prepare and implement a media and communications plan for a regular information dissemination campaign and advocacy;

--- [Page 10] ---
Page 8 of 10
Ord. No. 0298-09

ARTICLE IX
TAX REBATES AND OTHER INCENTIVES

Section 24. Subsidies and Tax Rebates - The City Treasurer's Office with the assistance of the City Engineer's Office and City Agriculturist's Office shall prepare guidelines on the grant of subsidies and tax rebates to owners of existing agricultural, residential, industrial, and commercial buildings or plantations upon installation of an RCS in compliance with this ordinance. The guidelines shall be submitted to the Sangguniang Panlungsod for approval;

ARTICLE X
ECOLOGICAL AND SEALING FEES

Section 25. Ecological Fee - The City Treasurer's Office shall prepare guidelines on the fees to be collected from the owners of buildings without appropriate RCS considering the volume of water withdrawn from the water utility that are used for non-potable purposes and the volume of untreated water discharged to the manmade and natural waterways. The same shall be submitted to the Sangguniang Panlungsod for approval;

Section 26. Sealing Fee - In addition, the City Treasurer's Office together with the City Engineer's Office shall formulate guidelines on the fees to be collected for the areas sealed or to be sealed due to the development of a site such as roads, open air parking area, sports and recreational facilities and the like considering the volume of the surface runoff and the untreated water discharged to the manmade and natural waterways. The guidelines shall be submitted to the Sangguniang Panlungsod for approval;

ARTICLE XI
MONITORING AND EVALUATION

Section 27. Monitoring - The Watershed Management Council shall establish an update database on all RCS in Davao City;

Section 28. Evaluation - After the effectiveness of the ordinance, the Watershed Management Council shall prepare a report on the impact of rainwater harvesting including the management of freshwater resources of the City, the reduction or mitigation of local flooding and erosion of canals and the enhancement in the quality of surface water;

--- [Page 11] ---
Page 9 of 10
Ord. No. 0298-09

ARTICLE XII
PENAL PROVISIONS

Section 29. Penalties - Any person or persons, business entity or corporation found violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be penalized with a fine of ONE THOUSAND PESOS [P1,000.00] but not exceeding FIVE THOUSAND PESOS [P5,000.00] and/or imprisonment for a period of six (6) months but not exceeding one (1) year at the discretion of the court;

ARTICLE XIII
IMPLEMENTING RULES AND REGULATIONS

Section 30. Implementing Rules and Regulations - The Watershed Management Council shall formulate and issue the implementing rules and regulations of this Ordinance within one (1) month but not more than one (1) year from approval thereof;

ARTICLE XIV
APPROPRIATION

Section 31. Collected Ecological and Sealing Fees - The collected ecological and sealing fees shall be used for the granting of incentives for compliance with this ordinance including programs or projects for the improvement of freshwater resources in the City;

ARTICLE XV
FINAL PROVISIONS

Section 32. Severability Clause - If for any reason, any section or provision of this Ordinance is declared unconstitutional or invalid, the other sections or provisions hereof which are not affected thereby shall continue to be in full force and effect;

Section 33. Repealing Clause - All Ordinances, local issuances or rules inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed or modified accordingly;

Section 34. Effectivity Clause - This Ordinance shall take effect 30 days after its approval and after completion of its publication in a local newspaper.

ENACTED, October 27, 2009, by a majority vote of all the Members of the Sangguniang Panlungsod.

--- [Page 12] ---
Page 10 of 10
Ord. No. 0298-09
(Note: Councilor Coarado C. Baluran was out when this ordinance
was approved.)
CERTIFIED CORRECT:
MARGARITO C. DEIA CRUZ
Assistant Secretary (to the Sangguniang Panlungsod
(City Government Asst. Department Head II)
ATTESTED:
MA. BELEN S. ACOSTA
Acting Vice Mayor
this date
APPROVED:
2009
LAPSED
RODRIGO R. DUTERTE
City Mayor
ATTESTED:
WENDEL E. AVISADO
City Administrator
