=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 000102-03 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
13th City Council
19th Regular Session
Series of 2003

Republica ng Pilipinas
SANGGUNIANG PANLUNGSO
Lungsod ng Dabaw

PRESENT:
Councillor
Emmanuel D. Galicia, Sr. - Acting Presiding Officer
Councillor
Nilo G. Abellera
Councillor
Ma. Belen S. Acosta
Councillor
Victorio S. Advincula, Sr.
Councillor
Wilberto E. Al-ag
Councillor
Aleixus C. Almedrasd
Councillor
Leonel A. Avila, III
Councillor
Gerald B. Barney
Councillor
Salvador V. Cauges, Sr.
Councillor
Damilo C. Dayagharang
Councillor
Shane L. Delor
Councillor
Jimmy G. Dureza
Councillor
Francisco D. Espina, A. Laman
Councillor
Peter T. Lavita
Councillor
Angela A. Librado
Councillor
Liborio V. Llamas
Councillor
Diezdeido Angelito, Jr., Malipipus, Sr.
Councillor
Amilcar M. Mendiang
Councillor
Bonifacio E. Militar
Councillor
Tomas J. Monteverde, IV
Councillor
Beethoven L. Orcullo
Councillor
Myrna G. L'Dalado-Ortiz
Councillor
Susana Isabel C. Reta
Councillor
Inocito I. Ungab

ON OFFICIAL BUSINESS:
Vice Mayor
Luis C. Bengayun - OIC, City Mayor's Office
Councillor
April Marie C. Dayap - Island Garden City of Samal

ABSENT:
Councillor
Teresita M. Maraison - On Maternity Leave

ORDINANCE NO. 0102-03
Series of 2003

AN ORDINANCE AMENDING FURTHER
ORDINANCE NO. 230, SERIES OF 1991, OTHERWISE
KNOWN AS THE LOCAL TAX CODE OF DAVAO
CITY, AS AMENDED, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

Be it enacted by the Sangguniang Panlungsod of Davao City in session assembled that:

--- [Page 2] ---
Page 2 of 37
Ord. No. 0102-03
SECTION 1. There is hereby added tourism related terms to the existing definition of terms under Article 3 of Ordinance No. 230, Series of 1991, otherwise known as the Tax Code of Davao City, as follows:
(a-8) Apartel - any building or edifice containing several independent and furnished or semi-furnished apartments, regularly leased to tourists and travelers for dwelling on a more or less long-term basis and offering basic services to its tenant, similar to hotels.
(c-2) Convention - is any gathering for the purpose of exchanging or disseminating views, technical expertise, experiences, knowledge, skills, information, policies or any other related activity. It does not include corporate meetings where corporate participation is limited to company personnel only. The term embraces the following:
1. Conference - is usually a general session and face-to-face groups with high participation to plan, get facts, solve organization and member problems.
2. Congress - is a more commonly used European designation for convention and mainly international in scope.
3. Seminar - is usually a one face-to-face group sharing experiences in a particular field under the guidance of an expert discussion leader, with a maximum attendance of 50 persons.
4. Lecture - is a formal presentation by an expert sometimes followed by question and answer period.
5. Symposium - is a panel discussion by experts in a given field before a large audience, some audience participation but appreciably less than a forum.
6. Forum - is a panel discussion taking opposite sides of an issue by experts in a given field with liberal opportunity for audience participation.
7. Workshop - is usually a general session and face-to-face groups of participants training each other to gain new knowledge, skills or insights to problems. Attendance is generally from 30-50 participants.
8. Colloquium - is a program in which the participants determine the matter to be discussed. The leaders would then construct the program around the most frequent problems, usually attended by a maximum of 33 persons with equal emphasis on instruction and discussion.
9. Professional Congress Organizer (PCO) - is any person, natural or juridical, who manages conventions, either as an official of an organization, consultant, volunteer or as a retired professional.
(d-3) Department store - is a store that sells or carries lines of merchandise that is organized into separate sections for the purpose of promotion, service, accounting and control.

--- [Page 3] ---
Page 3 of 37
Ord No. 0102-03

(6.3) Ferry - any vessel having provision only for deck passengers as defined in the Philippine Merchant Marine Rules and Regulations.

(h-1) Hotel - a building, edifice or premises or a completely independent part thereof, which is used for the regular reception, accommodation or lodging for travelers and tourists and the provision of services incidentally thereto for a fee.
1. De Luxe - luxurious, elegant or expensive hotel that is complete with all the facilities and amenities pertaining to hotel establishments.
2. First Class - a hotel of high quality but of inferior quality to De Luxe Hotels in terms of facilities and amenities.
3. Standard - a sound and usable but not of top quality hotel conforming to the standards of the Department of Tourism and law.
4. Economy - thrifty and efficient hotel.

(i-1) Inbound tour - is a tour to or of the Philippines or any place within the Philippines.

(i-5) LTFRB - the Land Transportation Franchising and Regulatory Board of the Republic of the Philippines.

(i-6) LTO - the Land Transportation Office of the Republic of the Philippines.

(i-7) Long-haul trip - travel of considerable distance in terms of period of time, which shall be measured at a minimum of four (4) hours from point of embarkation to final destination.

(m-8) Motel - hotel (Motel) - any structure with several separate units, primarily located along the highway with individual or common parking space at which motorists may obtain lodging and, in some instances, meals.

(m-1) Museum - is an institutional establishment where a collection of valuable objects and artifacts on history and culture, arts and sciences are put on exhibition for the general public.

(n-1) National Homestay Program - is a program of the Department of Tourism which provides travelers with comfortable accommodations with Filipino families in areas near tourist attractions.

(p-10) Pension house - a private or family-operated tourist boarding house, tourist guest house or tourist lodging house employing non-professional domestic helpers regularly conducting several independent lettable rooms, providing common facilities such as toilets, bathrooms/showers, living and dining rooms and/or kitchen and where a combination of board and lodging may be provided.

(p-11) Passenger ship - is any vessel which is authorized to carry more than twelve (12) passengers as further defined in the Philippine Merchant Marine Rules and Regulations.

(p-12) Pleasure yacht - is any vessel which is used for pleasure only as defined in the Philippine Merchant Marine Rules and Regulations.

--- [Page 4] ---
Page 4 of 37
Ord. No. 0102-03
(1-13) Passenger accommodation area - it is a passenger seating area and/or cabin/sleeping area.
(1-16) Resort - any place or places with pleasant environment and atmosphere conducive to comfort, healthful relaxation and rest, offering food, sleeping accommodation and recreational facilities to the public for a fee or remuneration.
(1-7) Short-haul trip - is the travel of a considerable distance in terms of period of time, which shall be measured at a maximum of four (4) hours from point of embarkation to final destination.
(1-8) Shop - is a small retail establishment offering a line of goods or services.
(1-9) Sports and recreational club/center - is any establishment offering sports and recreational facilities to tourists and to the general public.
(1-2) Tourism-Oriented and Related Establishments - refer to those that do business regarding and catering to tourism industry which includes among others, restaurants, department stores, shops, sports and recreational clubs/centers, museums, training centers, hostels, rest areas in gasoline stations.
(1-6) Tourism-Oriented and Related Occupation - means one's regular business or employment, or an activity, which principally takes up one's time, thought and energy. It includes any calling, business, trade, profession or vocation regarding and relating to tourism industry.
(1-5) Tourist Inn - lodging establishment catering to transients, which does not meet the minimum requirements of an economy hotel.
(1-4) Tour operator - is an entity which may either be a single proprietorship, partnership or corporation regularly engaged in the business of extending to individuals or groups, such services pertaining to arrangements and bookings for transportation and/or accommodation, handling and/or conduct of inbound tours whether or not for a fee, commission, or any other form of lawful remuneration.
(1-7) Guide - is an individual who guides tourists, both foreign and domestic, for a fee, commission, or any other form of lawful remuneration.
(1-8) Tourist land transport operator - is a person or entity which may either be a single proprietorship, partnership or corporation, regularly engaged in providing for a fee or lawful consideration, tourist transport services as hereinafter defined, either on charter or regular run.
(1-9) Tourist water transport - is any watercraft catering to tourists.
(1-10) Tourist air transport - is any air conveyance catering to tourists.
(1-11) Training center - is any establishment which offers one or more training programs for tourism manpower development and which is equipped with training facilities, equipment and instructional staff.
(1-12) Training program - is a module designed for tourism manpower development.

--- [Page 5] ---
Page 5 of 37
Ord. No. 0102-03

(1-13) Trainor - any individual who conducts training programs as specified in the preceding paragraph.
(1-14) Travel Agency - an agency engaged in selling and arranging personal transportation and accommodation for travelers.
(1-15) Travel Agent - a person engaged in selling and arranging transportation tours or trips for travelers.
(w-9) Watercraft - every description of conveyance, except seaplane, used or being capable of use as a means of transportation on water which shall include passenger ship, ferry, pleasure yacht and other similar and analogous conveyances.

SECTION 2. There is hereby added paragraphs 3 to 6 to Section 3, Article 4 of Ordinance No. 230, Series of 1991, as follows:

3. Requirements for tourism-oriented and tourism-related businesses, trade, and occupation. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to conduct or engage in any business, trade or occupation offering its products, services, trade, merchandise, or goods to tourists, within the territorial jurisdiction of the City of Davao for which permit is required for the proper supervision and enforcement of existing laws and ordinances governing the utilization, security, and welfare of the employees thereof, safeguarding the individual security and welfare of the employees thereof, and the business trade and occupation as specified in this Ordinance and other ordinances that may hereafter be enacted, without first having been registered and licensed by the Tourism Promotion Division of the City Mayor's Office, and paying the fees therefor.

PROVIDED, that the Tourism Promotion Division of the City Mayor's Office, together with the Department of Tourism has the power to change the business name of any tourism-oriented and tourism-related establishment and suggest to the Department of Trade and Industry the appropriate business name based on the classification standards set by the Department of Tourism;

PROVIDED, FURTHER, that all registered businesses shall display their business names in their respective places of business and likewise in advertisements as registered under this Ordinance. This requirement shall be strictly observed so as not to mislead customers, clients, and the public.

4. One-Time Registration Fee of First-time Tourism-oriented and Tourism-related business, trade, or occupation. There is hereby imposed the following registration fees upon persons or entities newly engaged in tourism-oriented or tourism-related business, trade, or occupation, before they can be issued a certificate of license:

a. Hotel
1. De Luxe Class
P 10,000.00

There are hotels that are specifically defined under Section 3 of the Rules and Regulations issued by the Department of Tourism on August 26, 1992, to govern the accreditation of hotels, tourist units, apartments, resorts, pension houses and other accommodation establishments;

--- [Page 6] ---
Page 6 of 37
Ord. No. 0102-03

These hotels must have the following minimum essentials for the establishment,
operation and maintenance of a de luxe class hotel:

a. Location
1. The locality and environment, including approaches shall be suitable for a luxury
hotel of international standard.
2. The façade, architectural features and general construction of the building
shall have the distinctive qualities of a luxury hotel.

b. Bedroom Facilities and Furnishings:
1. Size. All single and double rooms shall have a floor area of not less than twenty-five (25) square meters, inclusive of bathrooms.
2. Suite. There shall be one (1) suite per thirty (30) guests.
3. Bathrooms
1. All rooms must have bathrooms which shall be equipped with fittings of the highest qualitybefitting a luxury hotel with 24-hour service of hot and cold running water;
2. Bathrooms shall be provided with bathtubs and showers;
3. Floors and walls shall be covered with impervious materials of elegant design and high quality workmanship.
4. Telephone. There shall be a telephone in each guest room and an extension line in the bathroom of each suite.
5. Radio Television. There shall be a radio, a television and relayed or piped-in music in each guest room.
6. Cold Drinking Water. There shall be a cold drinking water and glasses in each bedroom.
7. Refrigerator/Mini-Bar. There shall be a small refrigerator and a well-stocked bar in each guest room.
8. Room Service. There shall be a 24-hour room service, including provisions for snacks and light refreshments.
9. Furnishings and Lighting
1. All guest rooms shall have adequate furniture of the highest standard and elegant design; floors shall have superior quality wall-to-wall carpeting; walls shall be well-furnished with well-tailored draperies of rich materials;
2. Lighting arrangements and fixtures in the rooms and bathrooms shall be so designed to ensure aesthetic as well as functional excellence.

--- [Page 7] ---
Page 7 of 37
Ord. No. 0102-03

10. Information Materials: Room tariff shall be prominently displayed in each bedroom plus prominent notices for services offered by the hotel, including food and beverage outlets and hours of operation, fire exit guidelines and house rules for guests.

b. Front Office/Reception:
There shall be a reception, information counter and guest-relations office providing a 24-hour service and attended to by highly-qualified, trained and experienced staff.
1. Lounge: There shall be a well-appointed lounge with seating facilities, the size of which is commensurate with the size of the hotel.
2. Foreign Exchange Counter: There shall be a duly licensed and authorized foreign exchange counter.
3. Mailing Facilities: Mailing facilities, including sale of stamps and envelopes, shall be available in the premises.
4. Long Distance/Overseas Calls: Long distance and overseas telephone calls shall be made available in the establishment.
5. Reception Amenities: There shall be a left-luggage room and safety deposit boxes in the establishment.
6. Telex and Facsimile: There shall be telex-transceiver and facsimile facilities in the establishment.

c. Housekeeping:
Housekeeping shall be of the highest possible standard.
1. Linen: There shall be plentiful supply of linens, blankets, towels, etc., which shall be spotlessly clean. The linens, blankets and towels shall be changed daily.
2. Laundry/Dry Cleaning Service: Laundry and dry cleaning services shall be available in the establishment.
3. Carpeting: All public and private rooms shall have superior quality carpeting which shall be well kept at all times.

e. Food and Beverage
1. Dining Rooms: There shall be a coffee shop and at least one specialty dining room which are well equipped, well-furnished and well-maintained, serving high quality cuisine and providing entertainment.
2. Bar: Wherever permissible by law, there shall be an elegant and well-stocked bar with an atmosphere of comfort and luxury.

--- [Page 8] ---
Page 8 of 37
Ord. No. 0102-03

3. Kitchen
1. The kitchen, pantry and cold storage shall be professionally designed to ensure efficiency of operation and shall be well-equipped, well-maintained, clean and hygienic;
2. The kitchen shall have an adequate floor area with non-slip flooring and tiled walls and adequate light and ventilation.

4. Crockery
1. The crockery shall be of elegant design and of superior quality;
2. There shall be ample supplies of it;
3. No pieces of crockery shall be chipped, cracked or damaged. The silverware shall be kept well-plated and polished at all times.

f. Recreational Facilities
1. Swimming Pool. There shall be a well-designed and properly equipped swimming pool.
2. Tennis/Golf/Squash/Gym Facilities. There shall be at least one recreational facility or tie-up with one within the vicinity of the hotel.

g. Entertainment. Live entertainment shall be provided.

h. Engineering and Maintenance
1. Maintenance. Maintenance of all sections of the hotel (i.e., buildings, furniture, fixtures, etc.) shall be of superior standard.
2. Air-conditioning. There shall be centralized air-conditioning for the entire building (except in areas which are at a minimum of 3,000 feet above sea level).
3. Ventilation. There shall be technologically advanced, efficient and adequate ventilation in all areas of the hotel.
4. Lighting. There shall be adequate lighting in all public and private rooms.
5. Emergency Power. There shall be a high-powered generator capable of providing sufficient lighting for all guest rooms, hallways, public areas/rooms, and operating elevators, food refrigeration and water services.
6. Fire Prevention Facilities. The fire prevention facilities shall conform with the requirements of the Fire Code of the Philippines.

7. General Facilities
1. Outdoor Area. The hotel shall have a common outdoor area for guests (e.g., a roof garden or a spacious common terrace).
2. Parking Lots. There shall be an adequate parking space and valet service.

--- [Page 9] ---
Page 9 of 37
Ord No. 0102-03
3. Function Conference Facilities. There shall be one or more of each of the following: conference room, banquet hall with a capacity of not less than 200 people (seated) and private dining room.
4. Shops. There shall be a barbershop, DOT-accredited travel agency/tour counter, beauty parlor, and candy shop.
5. Security. Adequate security on a 24-hour basis shall be provided in all entrances and exits of the hotel premises.
6. Medical Services. A medical clinic to service guests and employees shall have a registered nurse on a 24-hour duty and a doctor on call.
i. Service and Staff
1. Professionally qualified, highly trained, experienced, efficient and courteous staff shall be employed.
2. The staff shall be in smart and clean uniforms.
j. Special Facilities. Business center, limousine service and airport transfers shall be provided.
2. First Class Hotel
F $,000.00
Pursuant to Section 4 of the Department of Tourism's Rules and Regulations, dated August 26, 1992, first-class hotels must have the following minimum requirements for their establishment, operation and maintenance:
a. Location
1. The location and environment, including approaches, shall be suitable for a first-class hotel of international standard.
2. The facade, architectural features and general construction of the building shall have the distinctive qualities of a first-class hotel.
b. Bedroom Facilities and Furnishings
1. Size. All single and double rooms shall have a floor area of not less than twenty-five (25) square meters, inclusive of bathrooms.
2. Suite. There shall be one (1) suite per forty (40) guest rooms.
3. Bathrooms
1. All rooms shall have bathrooms which shall be equipped with fittings of the highest quality befitting a first class hotel with a 24-hour service of hot and cold running water.
2. Bathrooms shall be provided with showers and/or bathtubs.
3. Floors and walls shall be covered with impervious materials of aesthetic design and high quality workmanship.
4. Telephone. There shall be a telephone in each guest room.

--- [Page 10] ---
Page 10 of 37
Ord. No. 0102-03

5. Radio Television. There shall be a radio, television and relayed or piped-in music in each guest room.

6. Cold Drinking Water. There shall be a 24-hour room service, including provisions for snacks and light refreshments.

7. Room Service. There shall be a 24-hour room service, including provisions for snacks and light refreshments.

8. Furnishings and Lighting:
1. All guest rooms shall have adequate furniture of very high standard and very good design; floors that have wall-to-wall carpeting; or if the flooring is of high quality material (matte, mosaic, etc.), carpets shall be provided and shall be of a size proportionate to the size of the room; walls shall be well-furnished with well-tailored draperies of very high quality material.
2. Lighting arrangements and fixtures in the rooms and bathrooms shall be so designed as to ensure functional excellence.

9. Information Materials. Room tariffs shall be prominently displayed in each bedroom plus prominent notices for services offered by the hotel, including food and beverage outlets and hours of operation, fire exit guidelines and house rules for guests.

c. Front Office Reception. There shall be a reception and information counter providing 24-hour service staffed by trained and experienced personnel.

1. Lounge. There shall be a lobby and well-appointed lounge with seating facilities; the size of which is commensurate with the size of the hotel.

2. Porter Service. There shall be a 24-hour porter service.

3. Foreign Exchange Counter. There shall be a duly licensed and authorized foreign exchange counter.

4. Mailing Facilities. Mailing facilities including sale of stamps and envelopes shall be available in the premises.

5. Long Distance/Overseas Calls. Long distance and overseas telephone calls shall be made available in the establishment.

6. Reception Amenities. There shall be a left-luggage room and safety deposit boxes in the establishment.

7. Telex and Facsimile. There shall be available telex-transceiver and facsimile facilities in the establishment.

d. Housekeeping. Housekeeping shall be of high standard.

8. Linen. There shall be a good supply of linens, blankets, towels, etc., which shall be of high quality and should be spotlessly clean. The linens, blankets, and towels shall be changed daily.

--- [Page 11] ---
Page 11 of 37
Ord. No. 0102-03

2. Laundry Dry Cleaning Services: Laundry and dry cleaning services shall be available in the establishment.

3. Carpeting: All public and private rooms shall have high quality carpeting which should be well kept at all times.

3. Standard Hotel
P 5,000.00

As defined under Section 5, of the Department of Tourism's Rules and Regulations dated August 26, 1992 the following are the minimum requirements for the establishment, operation and maintenance of a Standard Class Hotel:

a. Location:
1. The locality and environment including approaches shall be suitable for a very good hotel.
2. The architectural features and general construction of the building shall be of very good standard.

b. Bedroom Facilities and Furnishings:
1. Size: All single and double rooms shall have a floor area of not less than eighteen (18) square meters, inclusive of bathroom.
2. Bathrooms: All rooms must have bathrooms, which shall be equipped with showers and fittings of good quality.
3. Telephones: There shall be telephone in each guest room.
4. Cold Drinking Water: There shall be cold drinking water and glasses in each bedroom.
5. Room Service: Room service shall be provided at selected hours.

6. Furnishings and Lighting:
1. All guest rooms shall have furniture of very good standard and design; floors shall have good quality carpets; walls shall be well finished and draperies shall be well-tailored and of good material.
2. Lighting arrangement and fixtures in the rooms and bathrooms shall be well-designed ensuring complete satisfaction functionally.

7. Information Materials: Room tariff shall be prominently displayed in each bedroom plus prominent notices for services offered by the hotel, including food and beverage outlets and hours of operation, fire exit guidelines and house rules for guests.

c. Front Office Reception: There shall be a reception/information counter providing a 24-hour service and attended by qualified and experienced staff.

a. Lounge: There shall be a well-appointed lounge the size of which shall be commensurate with the size of the hotel.

b. Porter Service: Porter service shall be provided upon request.

--- [Page 12] ---
Page 11 of 37
Ord. No. 0102-03

2. Laundry Dry Cleaning Services: Laundry and dry cleaning services shall be available in the establishment.

3. Carpeting: All public and private rooms shall have high quality carpeting which should be well kept at all times.

3. Standard Hotel
P. $,000.00

As defined under Section 5, of the Department of Tourism's Rules and Regulations dated August 26, 1992, the following are the minimum requirements for the establishment, operation, and maintenance of a Standard Class Hotel:

a. Location
1. The locality and environment including approaches shall be suitable for a very good hotel.
2. The architectural features and general construction of the building shall be of very good standard.

b. Bedroom Facilities and Furnishings
1. Size: All single and double rooms shall have a floor area of not less than eighteen (18) square meters, inclusive of bathroom.
2. Bathrooms: All rooms must have bathrooms, which shall be equipped with showers and fittings of good quality.
3. Telephones: There shall be telephone in each guest room.
4. Cold Drinking Water: There shall be cold drinking water and glasses in each bedroom.
5. Room Service: Room service shall be provided at selected hours.
6. Furnishings and Lighting:
1. All guest rooms shall have furniture of very good standard and design; floors shall have good quality carpets; walls shall be well finished and doors shall be well-finished and of good material.
2. Lighting arrangements and fixtures in the rooms and bathrooms shall be well-designed ensuring complete satisfaction functionally.
7. Information Materials: Room tariff shall be prominently displayed in each bedroom plus prominent notices for services offered by the hotel, including food and beverage outlets and hours of operation, fire exit guidelines and house rules for guests.

c. Front Office Reception: There shall be a reception information counter providing 24-hour service and attended by qualified and experienced staff.
a. Lounge: There shall be a well-appointed lounge the size of which shall be commensurate with the size of the hotel.
b. Porter Service: Porter service shall be provided upon request.

--- [Page 13] ---
Page 12 of 37
Ord No. 0102-03

c. Foreign Exchange Counter: There shall be a duly licensed and authorized foreign exchange counter.

d. Mailing Facilities: Mailing facilities, including sale of stamps and envelopes, shall be available in the premises.

e. Long Distance Overseas Calls: Long-distance overseas calls shall be made available upon request.

f. Reception Amenities: There shall be a left-luggage room and safety boxes.

g. Telex Facilities: Telex facilities shall be optional.

d. Housekeeping: Housekeeping shall be of good standard.
1. Linens: There shall be an adequate supply of linens, blankets, towels, etc., of good quality, which shall be kept clean. Linens, blankets, and towels shall be changed daily.
2. Laundry/Dry Cleaning Service: Laundry and dry cleaning services shall be available by arrangement.
3. Carpets: There shall be carpets in all bedrooms and the floors of public rooms, unless properly covered, unless the flooring is of very high standard material.

e. Food and Beverage:
1. Dining Room: There shall be at least one dining room facility, which is well-equipped, and well-maintained and serves good-quality cuisine and provides entertainment.
2. Bar: Whenever permissible by law, there shall be a bar.
3. Kitchen: The kitchen, pantry, and cold storage shall be professionally designed to ensure efficiency of operation and shall be well-equipped, well-maintained, clean, and hygienic.
4. Crockery: The crockery shall be of good quality.
5. Maintenance: Maintenance of the hotel in all sections (i.e., building, furniture, fixtures, etc.) shall be of good standard.

--- [Page 14] ---
Page 13 of 37
Ord. No. 0102-03

2. Air-conditioning: At least 75% of the rooms shall be air-conditioned (except in areas which are at a minimum of 3,000 feet above sea level).

3. Ventilation: There shall be efficient and adequate ventilation in all rooms.

4. Emergency Power: There shall be a high-powered generator capable of providing sufficient lighting for all guest rooms, hallways, public area rooms, and operating elevators, food refrigeration, and water services.

5. Fire Prevention Facilities: The fire prevention facilities shall conform to the requirements of the Fire Code of the Philippines.

g. General Facilities

1. Parking: There shall be adequate parking space.

2. Shops: There shall be a sundry shop.

3. Security: Adequate security on a 24-hour basis shall be provided in all entrances and exits of the hotel.

4. Medical Services: There shall be a registered nurse on a 24-hour duty and a doctor on-call.

h. Service and Staff

1. Only qualified, trained, experienced, efficient, and courteous staff shall be employed.

2. The staff shall be in clean uniforms.

i. Special Facilities: Facilities for airport transfer shall be provided.

4. Economy Class Hotel
P 3,000.00

Pursuant to Section 6 of the Department of Tourism's Rules and Regulations, dated August 26, 1992, the following are the minimum requirements for the establishment, operation, and maintenance of an Economy Class Hotel:

a. Location:
1. The locality and environment, including approaches, shall be suitable for a good hotel.
2. The architectural features and general construction of the building shall be of good standard.

b. Bathroom Facilities and Furnishings:
1. Size: All single and double rooms shall have a floor area of not less than eighteen (18) square meters, inclusive of bathroom.
2. Bathrooms: All rooms shall have bathrooms equipped with showers and basic fittings of good standard with cold water running on a 24-hour basis and hot water running at selected hours.

--- [Page 15] ---
Page 14 of 37
Ord. No. 0102-03

3. Telephones. There shall be a call-bell in each guest room.
4. Cold Drinking Water. There shall be cold drinking water and glasses in each bedroom.
5. Room Service. Room service shall be provided at selected hours.
6. Furnishings and Lighting
a) All guest rooms shall have basic furniture of good design, floors shall be well furnished.
b) Lighting arrangements and fixtures in all rooms and bathrooms shall be of good standard.
7. Information Materials. Room (art) shall be prominently displayed in each bedroom plus prominent notices for services offered by the hotel, including food and beverage outlets and hours of operation, fire exit guidelines and house rules for guests.
c. Front Office Reception
1. Reception and Information Counter. There shall be a reception and information counter providing a 24-hour service and equipped with telephone.
2. Lounge. There shall be a reasonable furnished lounge commensurate with the size of the hotel.
3. Porter Service. Porter service shall be made available upon request.
4. Mailing Facilities. There shall be mailing facilities.
5. Long Distance/Overseas Calls. Long distance/overseas calls shall be made available upon request.
6. Reception Amenities. There shall be a left-luggage room and safe deposit boxes.
7. Telex Facilities. Telex facilities shall be optional.
d. Housekeeping. Premises shall be kept clean and tidy.
1. Linens. Clean, good quality linen, blankets, towels, etc., shall be supplied and changed.
2. Laundry/Dry Cleaning Services. Laundry and dry cleaning services shall be available by arrangement.
e. Food and Beverages
1. Dining Room. There shall be at least one equipped and well-maintained dining room/restaurant serving good, clean and wholesome food.
2. Kitchen.
a) There shall be a clean, hygienic and well-equipped and maintained kitchen and pantry;

--- [Page 16] ---
Page 15 of 37
Ord No. 0102-03

b) The kitchen shall have an adequate floor area with non-slip flooring and tiled walls and adequate light and ventilation.

3. Crockery: The crockery shall be of good quality.

f. Engineering and Maintenance

1. Maintenance: Maintenance of the hotel in all sections (i.e., building, furniture, fixtures, etc.) shall be of good standard.
2. Air-conditioning: At least 50% of the rooms shall be air-conditioned (except in areas which are at a minimum of 2,000 feet above sea level).
3. Ventilation: There shall be adequate ventilation in all rooms.
4. Lighting: There shall be adequate lighting in all public and private rooms.
5. Emergency Power: There shall be a spare generator available to provide light and power in emergency cases.
6. Fire Prevention: The fire prevention facilities shall conform to the requirements of the Fire Code of the Philippines.

g. General Facilities

1. Shops: There shall be a sundry counter.
2. Security: Adequate security on a 24-hour basis shall be provided in all entrances and exits of the hotel premises.
3. Medical Services: The services of a doctor shall be available when needed.
h. Service and Staff

1. The staff shall be well-trained, experienced, courteous, and efficient.
2. The staff shall be in clean uniforms.
i. Special Facilities: Airport transfer shall be provided.

B. Resorts: Resorts may be categorized as beach resort (located along the seashore), inland resort (located within the town proper or city), island resort (located in natural or man-made islands within the internal waters of the Philippine Archipelago), lakeside or lakefront resort (located along or near the bank of a lake or river), mountain resort (located at or near a mountain or hill), and theme parks.

1. Class AAA Resorts: P. 5,000.00

Under Section 9 of the DOT Rules and Regulations, the following are the minimum requirements for the operation and maintenance of a Class AAA resort:

a. Location and Environment: The resort shall be situated in a suitable location free from noise, atmospheric, and marine pollution.
b. Parking (If applicable): An adequate parking space with parking security shall be provided free to guests.

--- [Page 17] ---
Page 16 of 37
Ord. No. 0102-03
c. Facilities and Room Accommodation. The resort shall have its rooms, facilities and amenities equivalent to those of a First Class Hotel required under Section 2.5.a.2 hereof.
d. Public Washroom. There shall be a clean and adequate public toilet and bathroom for male and female, provided with sufficient hot and cold running water, toilet paper, soap, hand towel and/or hand dryer.
e. Sports and Recreational Facilities. The resort shall offer at least four (4) sports and recreational facilities.
f. Conference/Convention Facilities. Conference/convention facilities with attached toilets shall be provided.
g. Employee Facilities. Adequate and well-maintained cafeteria, locker rooms and separate bathrooms for male and female employees shall be provided.
2. Class AA Resorts
P 2,000.00
As defined under Section 10 of the Department of Tourism's Rules and Regulations, dated August 26, 1992, the following are the minimum requirements for the operation and maintenance of a Class AA Resort:
a. Location and Environment. The resort shall be located in a suitable area free of noise, atmospheric and marine pollution.
b. Parking (if applicable). An adequate parking space with parking security shall be provided free to guests.
c. Facilities and Room Accommodation. The resort shall have its rooms, facilities and amenities equivalent to those of a Standard Class Hotel as required under Section 2.5.a.2 hereof.
d. Public Washroom. There shall be a clean and adequate public toilet and bathroom for male and female, provided with sufficient running water, toilet paper, soap, hand towel and/or hand dryer.
e. Sports and Recreational Facilities. The resort shall offer at least three (3) sports and recreational facilities.
f. Conference Convention Facilities. Conference/convention facilities shall be provided.
g. Employee Facilities. Adequate and well-maintained locker rooms and bathrooms for male and female employees shall be provided.
3. Class A Resort
P 2,000.00
Pursuant to Section 11 of the DOT rules, the following are the minimum requirements for the operation and maintenance of a Class A Resort:
a. Location and Environment. The resort shall be located in a suitable location free of noise, atmospheric and marine pollution.
b. Parking (if applicable). An adequate parking space with parking security shall be provided free to guests.

--- [Page 18] ---
Page 17 of 37
Ord. No. 0102-03

c. Room Accommodations: Class A resort shall have its rooms equivalent to those of an Economy Class hotel as required under Section 2.5.a.4 hereof.
d. Public Washrooms: There shall be a clean and adequate public toilet and bathroom for male and female, provided with sufficient running water, toilet paper, and soap.
e. Sports and Recreational Facilities: The resort shall offer at least two (2) sports and recreational facilities.
f. Food and Beverage Outlets: The resort shall have at least one (1) food and beverage outlet.

P. 1,500.00

Under Section 12 of the Department of Tourism's Rules and Regulations, dated August 26, 1992, the following are the minimum requirements for the operation and maintenance of a Special Interest Resort:

a. Location: The camp and ground site shall be well drained and not subject to flooding. It shall be distant from any source of nuisance and shall not endanger sources of any water supply and other natural resources.

b. Lounge and Reception Counter: There shall be a reception counter and a reasonable furnished lounge commensurate with the size of the resort.

c. Room Accommodation: There shall be at least five (5) lettable bedrooms for permanent site operations. The bedroom shall be reasonably spacious and provide at least two double beds, sufficient and fresh supply of clean linen, mirror and electric fan, except in areas where they are not practicable. For movable operation, a minimum of sixteen (16) guests plus the staff shall be accommodated in tents, lean-to's and the like. Where permanent tents are used, flooring shall be at least four (4) inches above the ground. Tents shall be provided with adequate bedding suitable for tropical use. Theme parks may be exempted from this requirement.

d. Toilet and Bathrooms: There shall be separate clean toilet and bathroom facilities for male and female guests, which shall be provided with sufficient supply of running water and situated in appropriate and accessible areas. The same shall apply to mobile campsites. In areas where non-rechargeable chemical toilets shall be provided at the campsite for mobile groups, in the absence of chemical toilets, temporary sanitary latrines shall be provided, based on acceptable Philippine standards.

e. Lighting, Furnishings and Ventilation: Lighting arrangement and furnishings in all rooms shall be of good standard. In areas where there is no electrical power, each room shall be provided with non-hazardous portable light. Adequate means of ventilation shall also be provided.

f. Staff and Service: Adequate number of trained, experienced, courteous and efficient staff shall be employed. They shall wear clean uniforms at all times. The front-line staff shall have a good speaking skill of the English language.

--- [Page 19] ---
Page 18 of 37
Ord No. 0102-03

g. General Rules on the Operation and Management of Resorts:

a) Maintenance and housekeeping: Maintenance of all sections of the resort shall be of acceptable standard, and shall be on a continuous basis, including the upkeep of the building and grounds utilized as well as its upkeep. Housekeeping shall be such a standard that it may be deemed clean and pollution-free premises. A vermin control program shall be regularly maintained in all areas of the resort. Regular and hygienic garbage disposal system shall be maintained. Sanitation measures shall be adopted in accordance with the standards prescribed under P.D. 816, the Code on Sanitation of the Philippines.

b) Lifeguard and security: All resorts shall provide the services of a sufficient number of well-trained lifeguards duly accredited by either the National Red Cross (NRC), the Water Life Saving Association of the Philippines or any recognized organization training or promoting safety procedures, and adequate security, whenever there are guests.

c) Medical services: All resorts shall provide services of a physician, either on-call or full-time, based on their volume of operation and accessibility to the hospital. The resort owner or manager shall employ adequate first-aiders who have completed a course in first aid duly certified by the Philippine National Red Cross (PNRC) or any other organization accredited by the same. Adequate first-aid medicines and necessary life-saving equipment shall be provided within the premises.

d) Fire-fighting facilities: Fire-fighting facilities shall be provided in accordance with the Fire Code of the Philippines.

e) Signboards: Appropriate signboards shall be conspicuously displayed outside the establishment showing clearly the name and classification of the resort as determined by the Department.

f) Beach and lakeside resort: There shall be placed on a beach or lakeside resort an adequate number of buoys which shall be spaced within the area to be determined by the resort owner or keeper as safe for swimming purposes, and in compliance with existing government regulations and/or local ordinances on the placing of such buoys.

g) Designated areas: The distance fronting the area of the resort with adequate number of buoys as provided in the preceding section shall be designated as the area for swimming purposes, and no boat, banana or other crafts shall be allowed to enter the area so designated. The resort owner or his duly authorized representative shall be empowered under this regulation to designate such areas as he deems fit to constitute a portion of the beach front to be used exclusively for loading and unloading of resort guests unless otherwise designated elsewhere by rules and regulations specific to the area.

h) Precautionary measures:
1) In no case shall the resort management allow swimming at the beach front beyond 10:00 p.m. and appropriate notice shall be posted to inform the resort guests of this regulation.
2) Swimming in the pool shall be allowed only if there are adequate lifeguards on duty and when the pool premises is sufficiently lighted.

--- [Page 20] ---
Page 19 of 37
Ord. No. 0102-03
3) Management shall post sufficient and visible signs in strategic areas in the resort or at the beach to warn guests/customers of the presence of artificial or natural hazards, danger areas or occurrences thereof.
i) Prohibited acts and practices.
1) No pet or animal shall be allowed to bathe/remain along the beach. Likewise, "puke" fishing and walking of fishing nets shall be strictly prohibited in the beach, lakes, rivers or lakeside resorts.
2) Resort owners shall prohibit ambulant vendors from peddling their wares within the resort premises in order to provide their guests a certain degree of privacy, to enable them to relax and enjoy their stay there.
3) Littering in resorts shall be strictly prohibited. Resort owners shall keep their premises clean and shall adopt their own anti-littering measures.
4) Without prejudice to existing ones, no resort shall be established or constructed within a radius of five (5) kilometers from any pollution-causing factory or plant.
C. Tourist Inn/Apartel/Motel Pension House and other similar establishment.
1. The following are the minimum requirements for the establishment, operation, and maintenance of an apartel:
a) Size. The apartel shall have at least a minimum of twenty-five (25) lettable apartments.
b) Apartment. Each apartment of the apartel shall be provided with living and dining areas, kitchen, and bedroom with attached toilet and bath.
c) Living Area. The living area shall be provided with essential and reasonable comfortable furniture.
d) Kitchen. The kitchen shall be spacious, clean, hygienic, and adequately equipped with cooking utensils. It shall also be provided with facilities for storage and refrigeration of foods, for disposal of garbage, and for cleaning of dishes and cooking utensils.
e) Dining Area. The dining area shall be spacious and provided with dining tables and chairs, including all essential dining facilities, such as, but not limited to: plates, spoons and forks, drinking glasses, etc.
f) Toilet and Bathrooms. The toilet and bathrooms shall always be clean and have adequate sanitation and running water.
g) Bedroom. The bedroom shall be spacious and provided with comfortable bed. There must also be provided a closet and a mirror.
h) Linen. The apartel shall have sufficient supply of clean linen. The linen shall be changed regularly.

--- [Page 21] ---
Page 20 of 37
Ord No. 0102-03

i) Ventilation: The apartment shall be sufficiently ventilated and, if possible, each bedroom shall be air-conditioned or provided with an electric fan. This requirement shall not be applicable in high altitude areas.

j) Lighting: Lighting arrangements and fixtures in all rooms shall be adequate.

k) Telephone: There shall be a telephone or a "call bell" button in each room.

l) Elevators: An elevator shall be provided for a building with more than three (3) stories whenever possible.

m) Staff and Services: The staff shall be trained, experienced, courteous, and efficient. They shall be provided with smart and clean uniforms.

n) Medical Facilities: An emergency clinic, stocked with emergency medicines and drugs to service employees and guests shall be provided. Appointed with more than one hundred (100) apartments shall secure the regular services of a house physician.

o) Fire-fighting Facilities: The apartment shall provide fire-fighting facilities in accordance with the Fire Code of the Philippines.

p) Lounge and Reception Counter: There shall be a reasonably furnished lounge commensurate with the size of the apartment. The reception counter shall be attended by trained and experienced staff and shall also be provided with a telephone.

q) Security: Adequate security on a 24-hour basis shall be provided in all entrances and exits of the apartment.

2. Tourist Innz: The following are the minimum requirements for the establishment, operation, and maintenance of a tourist inn:

a. Location: The tourist inn, except those already existing at the time of the promulgation of this Ordinance, shall be located along the principal highways or transportation routes and shall be opened to business on a twenty-four (24) hour basis.

b. Bedroom Facilities and Furnishings: All bedrooms shall have attached toilet and bath equipped with 24-hour service of running water. They shall have adequate natural as well as artificial light and ventilation and shall be furnished with comfortable beds and quality furniture (mirror, writing table, chair, closet, and dresser).

Walls shall be painted or wallpapered and kept clean and pleasing to the eye. Windows shall be furnished with clean and appropriate draperies. Floors shall be of good flooring materials. All single bedrooms shall have a floor area of not less than nine (9) square meters and all twin-room or double-rooms shall have a floor area of not less than fifteen (15) square meters.

There shall be vacuum bags or thermos flasks with drinking water and glasses in each bedroom. There shall be the requisite supply of clean linen, blankets and towels that shall be changed regularly.

--- [Page 22] ---
Page 21 of 37
Ord. No. 0102-03
c. Parking: There shall be adequate parking space for vehicles proportionate to the number of lettable rooms and other public facilities of the inn.
d. Reception: There shall be a reception and information counter attended to by qualified, trained, and experienced staff. There shall be a lobby and a well-appointed lounge for seating and/or reading purposes.
e. Telephone: There shall be adequate telephone facilities for the use of all guests in all public areas. Services for long-distance telephone calls or overseas calls shall be made available to guests.
f. Radio/Television: There shall be provision for radios and/or television sets for the use of guests upon request.
g. Dining Room: There shall be well-equipped, well-furnished, and well-maintained dining room/restaurant for its guests as well as the public in general. A kitchen, pantry, and cold storage shall be designed and organized to ensure efficiency of operation and shall be well-maintained, clean, and hygienic.
h. Security: Adequate security shall be provided to all guests and their belongings.
i. Emergency Power: Inn's with more than fifty (50) lettable rooms shall have emergency power facilities to light the common areas and emergency exits in case of power failure.
j. Fire-fighting Facilities: Adequate fire-fighting facilities shall be available as required and specified by the local fire department and/or the Fire Code of the Philippines.
3. Motels:
A. The following are the minimum requirements for the establishment, operation, and maintenance of motels:
a. Location: The motel, except those already existing, shall be located along or close to the highways or major transportation routes. It shall have at least ten (10) units.
b. Garage: The motel shall have an individual garage or a common parking space for the vehicle of its guests.
c. Bedroom: Each unit shall be provided with a fully air-conditioned bedroom, or at least, an electric fan, and shall be furnished with comfortable beds, clean pillows, linens, and bed sheets.
d. Toilet and Bathroom: The unit shall be provided with attached toilet and bathroom with cold and hot water, clean towels, tissue paper, and soap.
e. Telephone: There shall be a telephone or call bell in each unit.
f. Staff and Service: The motel staff shall be trained, experienced, courteous, and efficient. They shall wear clean uniforms while on duty.

--- [Page 23] ---
Page 22 of 37
Ord. No. 0102-03
E. Medical Services. Medical services on an emergency basis shall be made available.
F. Fire-fighting Facilities. Adequate fire-fighting facilities shall be provided for each separate unit/building, in accordance with the Fire Code of the Philippines.
G. Lighting. Lighting arrangement and fixtures in all units shall be adequate.
H. Housekeeping. Efficient housekeeping shall be maintained.
I. Maintenance. Efficient maintenance of the motel in all its sections (i.e., building ground, furniture, fixtures, public rooms, air-conditioning, etc.) shall be provided on a continuing basis.
J. Other Facilities. The motel may, at its option, serve food and drinks exclusively to its guests, and install such other special facilities necessary for their business.
K. Signboard. All motels shall keep and display in a conspicuous place outside the establishment a signboard showing clearly the name of the motel.
B. Registry.
a. Motel Registry Book. In addition to the above minimum requirements, all motels shall have a Motel Registry Book. All guests seeking accommodation in the establishment shall be required to register the following particulars in the Register Book:
1. Full name;
2. Address;
3. Number, date, and place of issue of Residence Certificate Class "A", or Driver's License, or passport;
The motel management is required to maintain a separate logbook of the plate number of the vehicle or cars used by its customers or guests coming into or leaving the motel.
b. Entry in the Motel Registry Book. The date prescribed in the preceding section shall be entered forthwith by the guests, if unable to write, by the motel keeper or motel clerk.
c. Minors to be accompanied by Parent or Guardian. No motel shall accept for lodging or accommodation any person below 18 years of age unless accompanied by a parent or guardian.
d. Departure of Guests. On the departure of the guests, the motel clerk shall record in the Registry Book the date and hour of their departure.
e. Room Rates. In addition to daily rates, motels may likewise impose wash-up rates.
No guest who desires to be accommodated on a daily basis shall be refused.

--- [Page 24] ---
Page 23 of 37
Ord No. 0102-03

The rental rates shall be posted prominently at the reception counter and/or at the door of each room.

4. PENSION HOUSES. The following are the minimum requirements for the establishment, operation, and maintenance of a pension house:

a. Size. A pension house shall have at least five (5) lettable rooms.

b. Bedrooms. The bedrooms shall be provided with sufficient number of comfortable bed-commensurate with the size of the room. Each room shall have adequate natural as well as artificial light and ventilation. It shall be provided with at least one electric fan, writing table, a closet, a water-jug with glasses proportionate to the number of beds in the room. Rooms shall be clean and presentable and reasonably furnished to depict the true atmosphere of a Filipino.

c. Common Toilet and Bathroom. The establishment shall provide a toilet and bathroom to be used in common by the guests. There shall be at least one (1) toilet and one (1) bathroom/shower for every five (5) guests.

d. Linen. There shall be adequate supply of clean linen and towels. Soap and tissue paper shall be provided at all times.

e. Living Room. There shall be a reasonably furnished lounge or living room and commensurate with the size of the pension house where guests may receive visitors, watch television or read.

Dining Room. The pension house shall have a dining room, which shall be available for the common use of its guests.

The following rates shall be imposed on Tourist Inns Associates Motels' Pension House and other similar establishments:

1. With more than 100 units lettable rooms: ₱3,000.00
2. With 51 to 99 units lettable rooms: ₱2,000.00
3. Less than 51 units lettable rooms: ₱1,000.00

Professional Congress Organizers: ₱2,000.00

A Professional Congress Organizer is any single proprietorship or a partnership, organized under the law of the Philippines, at least 50% of the capital of which is owned by Filipino Citizens, who are citizens of the Philippines and under the law of the Philippines, at least 50% of its subscribed common or voting stock of which is owned by Filipino citizens and the composition of its Board of Directors being at least 60% Filipinos, engaged in organizing or managing conventions, congresses, conferences, or any seminars, lectures, symposia, fora, workshops, colloquia, either as an official of an organization, consultant, volunteer or a retained professional.

E. Sauna Bath Parlour. As used herein, a sauna bath parlor refers to the building, edifice or premises or a completely independent part thereof where persons who travel and tourists may regularly receive as customers or guests and provided with sauna, steam bath and/or massage services for a fee.

--- [Page 25] ---
Page 24 of 37
Ord. No. 0102-03

1. Class A (Deluxe) Sauna Bath Parlor
P 2,000.00

The following are the minimum requirements for the establishment, operation, and maintenance of a Class A (Deluxe) sauna bath parlor:

1. Size:
a) All sauna bath parlors must have at least twenty-five (25) cubicles. Sauna and massage parlors located in hotels and forming part of the services of said hotels will be considered on a case-to-case basis. In all cases, however, the size of each cubicle or room must not be less than 1.00 m x 1.00 m with either curtains, sliding or swing doors, providing each door with a lock. There shall be at least two (2) bathrooms in both parlors operating within the premises of a hotel within the 5-star to 3-star classification, having less than twenty-five (25) cubicles may be allowed to operate on the condition that they will cater exclusively to hotel guests.
b) Each cubicle shall be air-conditioned and shall have at least the following facilities: a massage table, shower with running hot-and-cold water, locker, toilet dresser, and a lavatory.
c) Stairways and main hallways must be at least one (1) meter wide.

d) A presentable Reception Area must be provided where guests can be seated while waiting. Such area or room must be at least fifteen (15) square meters.

2. Location:
a) The locality and environment, including approaches should be suitable for a luxury sauna bath parlor of international standards.
b) The façade, architectural feature, and general construction of the building should have the distinctive qualities of a luxury sauna bath parlor.
3. Maintenance:
Maintenance of all the sections of the sauna bath parlor (i.e., building, furniture, fixtures, etc.) should be of highest standard.
4. Air-conditioning and Heating:
All public and private rooms should be fully air-conditioned except when located in a very cool environment where there should be heating arrangements.
5. Comfort Rooms:
All comfort rooms should be modern in design and equipped with fittings of highest quality befitting a luxury sauna bath parlor with hot and cold running water. The floors and walls should be covered with impervious materials of elegant design and high quality of workmanship. This is an item of qualitative assessment and the quality of equipment fittings, workmanship, and maintenance will count in making the assessment.
6. Reception:
There should be a reception counter or desk attended to by highly qualified, trained, and experienced staff.
7. Lounge:
There should be a lobby or a well-appointed lounge with seating facilities the size of which is commensurate to the use of the sauna bath parlor.

--- [Page 26] ---
Page 25 of 37
Ord. No. 0102-03

8. Furnishings and Lighting: Lighting arrangement and fixtures in the public rooms, comfort rooms, corridor, etc., should be designed to ensure aesthetic as well as functional excellence.

9. Telephone: There should be a telephone or public telephone accessible for use of the guests.

10. Carpeting: All public and private rooms should have superior quality carpeting or its equivalent that should be well kept at all times.

11. Service and Staff:
(a) Professionally qualified, highly trained, experienced, efficient and courteous staff should be employed.
(b) The staff should be in smart clean uniforms.
(c) The staff coming into contact with guests should understand and speak English, while supervisory and senior staff should have good knowledge of English and preferably other languages.

12. Housekeeping: Housekeeping should be of the highest quality standard.

13. Atmosphere: The sauna bath should have an atmosphere of elegance, luxury and good taste, and should give its guests a feeling of well being by befriending a deluxe sauna bath parlor.

14. Foreign Exchange Counter: There should be a duly licensed authorized foreign exchange counter.

15. Security: Adequate security must be provided.

16. Emergency Power: Heat, light, and emergency power sufficient to operate corridor and public room lights and water services must be provided.

17. Fire-fighting Facilities: Adequate fire-fighting facilities must be provided.

18. Special Facilities: Sauna bath parlor must have a laundry shop, complete with store supplies.

2. Class B (Ordinary): P 1,500.00

The following are the minimum requirements for the establishment, operation and maintenance of a Class B (Ordinary) Sauna Bath Parlor:

1. Size:
a. All saunas bath parlor must have at least twenty-five (25) massage cubicles or rooms. Such requirement may be waived on a case-to-case basis for justifiable economic and other reasons as determined and approved by the City Tourism Operations Office. Provided that the total number of massage cubicles provided shall not exceed one-half of the promulgation of these rules to leave at least twelve (12) cubicles.

--- [Page 27] ---
Page 26 of 37
Ord. No. 0102-03

Sauna and massage parlors located in hotels will be considered on a case-to-case basis; however, the size of each cubicle or room must not be less than 1.80 m x 2.80 m with either curtain, sliding or swinging doors; provided that such doors must not have a lock. Provided further, that sauna bath parlors operating within the premises of a hotel within the 5-star to 3-star classification, having less than twenty-five (25) cubicles may be allowed to operate on the condition that they will cater exclusively to hotel guests.

b. Each cubicle shall be air-conditioned and shall have at least the following facilities: a massage table, dresser and locker. Provided, however, that the parlor shall have and maintain a common shower room with hot and cold running water, toilet, powder room and lavatory.

c. Stairways and main hallways must be at least one (1) meter wide.

d. A presentable reception area must be provided where guests can be seated while waiting. Such area or room must have an area of at least 15 square meters.

2. Location:

a. The locality and environment, including approaches should be suitable for a luxury sauna bath of international standard.

b. The façade, architectural features and general construction of the building should have the distinctive qualities of a luxury sauna bath parlor.

3. Maintenance: Maintenance of all the sections of the sauna bath parlor (i.e., building, furniture, fixtures, etc.) should be of highest standard.

4. Air-conditioning and Heating: All public and private rooms should be fully air-conditioned except in mill station where there should be heating arrangements.

5. Comfort Rooms: All comfort rooms should be modern in design and equipped with fittings of the highest quality providing a luxury sauna bath with handsome furnishings made of durable materials, such as wood, with impervious materials, of elegant design and high quality workmanship. This is an item of qualitative assessment and the quality of the equipment fittings, workmanship and maintenance will count in making assessment.

6. Reception: There should be a reception counter or desk attended to by highly qualified, trained and experienced staff.

7. Lounge: There should be a lobby or a well-appointed lounge with seating facilities the size of which shall be commensurate with the size of the sauna bath parlor.

8. Furnishings and Lighting: Lighting arrangement and fixtures in the public rooms, comfort rooms, corridors, etc. should be so designed to ensure aesthetic as well as functional excellence.

9. Telephone: There should be a telephone or public call station accessible for the use of the guests.

10. Carpeting: All public and private rooms should have superior quality carpeting or its equivalent, which should be well kept at all times.

--- [Page 28] ---
Page 27 of 37
Ord. No. 0102-03

11. Service and Staff:
a) Professionally qualified, highly trained, experienced, efficient and courteous staff should be employed.
b) The staff should be in smart and clean uniforms.
c) The staff coming into contact with guests should understand and speak English, while supervisory and senior staff should have good knowledge of English.

12. Housekeeping: Housekeeping should be of highest possible standard.

13. Atmosphere: The sauna bath parlor should have an atmosphere of elegance, luxury, and good taste and give guests a feeling of well-being befitting an ordinary sauna bath.

14. Foreign Exchange Counter: There should be a duly authorized foreign exchange counter.

15. Security: Adequate security must be provided.

16. Emergency Powers: Heat, light, and emergency power sufficient to operate corridors and public room lights and services must be provided.

17. Fire-fighting Facilities: Adequate fire-fighting facilities must be provided.

18. Special Facilities: There must be a laundry shop with complete store supplies.

The herein classification of Sauna Bath Parlors is exclusive, and no building, edifice, premises or any part thereof not otherwise embraced in the sauna bath classification, shall, directly or indirectly, use, carry, print, display, or in any manner advertise the same as a sauna bath parlor or massage clinic.

Provided that the license to operate a sauna bath parlor shall be issued or renewed only in favor of Filipino Citizens or corporations, partnerships, or entities at least 60 percent of the authorized capital stock of which is owned and/or controlled by Filipino citizens, and that at least 60% of the staff are Filipino citizens.

F. TRAVEL & TOURS OPERATOR:
1. Travel and tour operators: $100.00
2. Foreign or outbound tour operators: $200.00
3. Local or inbound: $300.00

G. TOURISM-RELATED ESTABLISHMENTS:

RESTAURANTS:
The following are the minimum requirements that must be complied with by restaurants:
a. Location: The locality and environment, including approaches, shall be with proper signs and signs.
2. The facade and architectural features of the building shall be appropriately designed.

--- [Page 29] ---
Page 28 of 37
Ord. No. 0102-03

b. Parking: There shall be adequate and secured parking space provided free for customers.

c. Reception: A receptionist shall be available to usher in guests. A waiting lounge and a telephone shall be provided.

d. Dining Room: The following shall be observed in the dining room:
1. Furnishings: The dining room shall be adequate in size (spacious in area) with sufficient and well-maintained furniture. Flooring materials shall be kept clean at all times.
2. Atmosphere: The restaurant shall have a pleasant atmosphere.
3. Cuisine: There shall be cuisine of good quality and presentation available during normal meal hours and served with distinction. Raw food used shall meet minimum government and international standards.
4. Menu Book/Card: There shall be a menu book or card which shall be presentable, clean and easy to read with the menu items and corresponding prices listed in logical sequence. All items shall be made available at all times on a best-effort basis.
5. Linen: All tables shall have clean tablecloths and cloth napkins of good quality. They should not be folded, nor with frayed edges and stains and should be changed after every service.
6. Cutlery: No piece of crockery, cutlery and tableware in use shall be chipped, cracked or grazed. The silverware shall be kept polished and clean at all times.
e. Service and Staff: Adequate number of well-trained, well-groomed, experienced, efficient and courteous staff shall be employed.
f. Bar: The bar shall be well stocked at all times.
g. Comfort Rooms: All comfort rooms shall be with good quality fixtures and fittings and provided with running water. The floor and the walls shall be covered with impervious material of good quality workmanship and shall be kept clean and sanitary at all times. Tissue paper, soap, paper towels and/or hand dryer shall be provided.
h. Kitchen: 1. The kitchen, pantry and cold storage shall be in good operating condition at all times and shall be well equipped and hygienic in accordance with the City Health Office standards.
2. It shall be equipped with facilities or equipment necessary to maintain high standard of sanitation and hygiene.
i. Lighting: Adequate lighting shall be provided in dining rooms, public rooms, comfort room, corridors and other public areas.
j. Air-conditioning/Ventilation: All main dining or function rooms shall be fully air-conditioned and/or well ventilated.

--- [Page 30] ---
Page 29 of 37
Ord. No. 0102-03

k. Maintenance: All sections of the restaurant (e.g., building's exterior, interior, air-conditioners, kitchen, fixtures, plumbing, etc.) shall be maintained properly at all times. A periodic vermin control program shall be maintained for all establishments.

i. Fire-fighting Facilities: Adequate fire-fighting facilities shall be provided in accordance with the Fire Code of the Philippines.

1. First-Class Restaurant
P 1,000.00
The following are the minimum requirements for the establishment, operation, and maintenance of a First-class restaurant:
a. Comprehensive general liability insurance for guests with validity period concurrent with the license certificate in the amount not less than One Million Pesos (P 1,000,000).
b. Minimum capitalization of more than One Million Pesos (P 1M) as supported by a bank certification, when it is a partnership, or where it is a corporation, duly subscribed capital stock as shown in its Articles of Incorporation duly submitted to the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).
c. Upon compliance with the requirements for licensing, a one-time registration fee of Five Thousand Pesos (P 5,000.00) shall be collected from the applicants.
2. Second-class Restaurant
P 800.00
The following are the minimum requirements for the establishment, operation, and maintenance of a second-class restaurant:
a. Comprehensive general liability insurance for guests with validity period concurrent with the license certificate in the amount not less than Fifty Thousand Pesos (P 50,000.00).
b. Capitalization within One Million Pesos (P 1M) and Five Hundred Thousand Pesos (P 500,000) as supported by a bank certification; when it is a partnership, as shown in its Articles of Partnership, or when it is a corporation, a subscribed capital stock as shown in its Articles of Incorporation duly submitted to the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).
c. Upon compliance with the requirements for licensing, a one-time registration fee of Five Hundred Pesos (P 500.00) shall be collected from the applicants.

4. Boutiques, Gift & Souvenir Shops, Department Stores:
The following are the minimum requirements that must be complied with by boutiques, gift shops, and department stores:
a. Physical Requirements:
1. The establishment shall be fronting a major street or thoroughfare or is situated in a shopping center mall.

--- [Page 31] ---
Page 30 of 37
Ord. No. 0102-03
2. The entrance and display windows shall be attractively designed and adequately illuminated.
3. The furniture and decor of the establishment shall be presentable and functional at all times.
4. The shop shall be fully air-conditioned (or well ventilated).
5. The establishment shall provide well-maintained restrooms or in the event that the shop is located in a shopping mall or commercial building, a common public restroom shall be made available to the clients or visitors.
6. In case of department stores:
1) The store shall be in an edifice or a building or may be part of a shopping mall/center.
2) Parking area shall be made available to clients.
3) There shall be appropriate directional signs.
b. Staff: All members of the staff shall be well groomed, courteous, and efficient at all times.
c. Service:
1. Goods shall be displayed with clearly written price tags.
2. A wide selection of goods shall be in stock.
3. A receipt shall be supplied to the customer for each purchase. The full name and address of the establishment shall be printed on the receipt, together with the number of the authorized business license. The purchase shall be itemized, together with the price, and any addition or tax paid or discount granted on the goods shall be indicated.
4. Discounts shall be given on the price of the goods marked on the price tag.
5. The business establishment shall be responsible for the maintenance of its facilities and premises and its immediate surroundings (sidewalk, yard, etc.)
6. In case of antique shops, a certificate confirming authenticity shall be attached to each article in accordance with the guidelines/instructions of the National Museum.
a) Class AAA
P 3,000.00
The following are the requirements for the establishment, operation, and maintenance of Class AAA, boutiques, gift and souvenir shops, and department stores:
1. Minimum capitalization of more than One Million Pesos (P. 1M) as supported by a bank certification; when it is a partnership as shown in its Articles of Partnership, or when it is a corporation, a subscribed capital stock as shown in its Articles of Incorporation duly submitted to the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).

--- [Page 32] ---
Page 31 of 37
Ord. No. 0102-03
2. Upon compliance with the requirements for licensing, a one-time registration fee of Three Thousand Pesos (P 3,000.00) shall be collected from the applicants.
b) Class A4
P 2,000.00
The following are the requirements for the establishment, operation, and maintenance of Class A boutiques, gift and souvenir shops, and department stores:
1. Capitalization within One Million Pesos (P 1M) and Five Hundred Thousand Pesos (P500,000.00) as supported by a bank certification, when it is a partnership, as shown in its Articles of Partnership; or when it is a corporation, a subscribed capital stock as shown in its Articles of Incorporation duly submitted to the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).
2. Upon compliance with the requirements for licensing, a one-time registration fee of Two Thousand Pesos (P 2,000.00) shall be collected from the applicants.
c) Class A
P 1,000.00
The following are the requirements for the establishment, operation, and maintenance of Class A boutiques, gift and souvenir shops, and department stores:
1. Capitalization of less than Five Hundred Thousand Pesos (P 500,000.00) as supported by a bank certification, when it is a partnership, as shown in its Articles of Partnership; when it is a corporation, a subscribed capital stock as shown in its Articles of Incorporation duly submitted to the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC).
2. Upon compliance with the requirements for licensing, a one-time registration fee of One Thousand Pesos (P 1,000.00) shall be collected from the applicants.
5. SPORTS AND RECREATIONAL CLUBS, MUSEUMS, TRAINING CENTERS, HOMESTAY SITES, REST AREAS IN GASOLINE STATIONS
P 500.00
a. Sports and Recreational Club: The following are the minimum requirements for the establishment, operation, and maintenance of Sports and Recreational Clubs:
1. Location. The locality and environment, including approaches shall be planned with proper Higgins and agree. The façade and architectural features shall be appropriately designed.
2. Parking. There shall be adequate and secured parking space for customers.
3. Security. Adequate security shall be provided at all times.
4. Reception. A receptionist shall be available to usher in guests. A waiting lounge with telephone shall also be provided.

--- [Page 33] ---
Page 32 of 37
Ord. No. 0102-03
5. Dining Room: There shall be a dining outlet adequate in size, with pleasant atmosphere and furnished with appropriate and well-maintained furniture.
6. Sports and Recreational Equipment: There shall be adequate sports and recreational equipment available for rent and/or for sale.
7. Public Washrooms: There shall be adequate and accessible toilet facilities provided separately for male and female. Tissue paper, soap, hand paper towels shall also be provided.
8. Locker Areas and Facilities: There shall be an adequate number of lockers for male and female. Dressing areas and shower cubicles shall be provided.
9. Special Facilities: There shall be an adequate sundry shop complete with store supplies, provided that when the club site is far from any restaurant or establishment, it must have a coffee shop that provides refreshment or meals.
b. Museums: The following are the minimum requirements for the establishment, operation, and maintenance of museums:
1. Membership: The institution shall be a member of the National Committee on Museums.
2. Location: The locality and environment, including approaches, shall be pleasant with proper signs and agree. The façade and architectural features shall be appropriately designed.
3. Parking Area: An adequate and secured parking space for customers shall be made available.
4. Security: Adequate security shall be provided at all times.
5. Reception: A well-informed receptionist shall be available to usher in guests. A waiting lounge with telephone shall be provided.
6. Conference Auditorium: There shall be a conference and/or auditorium provided with audio-visual equipment available to the public.
7. Library: There shall be an adequately equipped library available to the public.
8. Public Washroom: There shall be adequate and accessible toilet facilities provided separately for male and female. Toiletries shall likewise be provided.
9. Training Center: The following are the minimum requirements for the establishment, location, and maintenance of a training center:
1. Physical Requirements:

--- [Page 34] ---
Page 33 of 37
Ord. No. 0102-03

1. Size of Classroom. The classroom shall be able to accommodate a minimum of twenty (20) trainees per class. For purposes of workshops, the floor area shall be a minimum of three square meters per trainee.

2. Lighting and Ventilation. Lighting and ventilation fixtures shall be designed to ensure an atmosphere conducive to training. A standby generator shall be made available.

3. Restrooms. There shall be a separate restroom for male and female.

4. Refreshments/Dining Area. There shall be a refreshment/dining area accessible to the trainees.

5. Classroom Facilities, Equipment and Supplies. The center shall be provided with a classroom complete with basic facilities, equipment and supplies needed in conducting a training program.

6. Workshop/On-the-job Facilities and Equipment. Workshop/On-the-job facilities and equipment depending on the training program being offered shall be adequately provided.

7. Reading Room. There shall be a reading room adequately provided with relevant reference materials, books, journals, magazines, and the like.

8. Other Support Facilities. There shall be tools/storage facilities provided.

2. Training Program.

1. Relevance. The training program shall respond to the needs of the tourism industry.

2. Objectives. Its objectives shall be clearly defined, realistic, and attainable.

3. Content/Curriculum. The content/curriculum of the training program shall be in consonance with its objectives. Topics shall be in proper logical sequence with due consideration to effectiveness of presentation in terms of trainee comprehension.

4. Methodology. There shall be an effective, simple, and comprehensive presentation of topics, clear description of examination scheme and test instruments related to course objectives. It shall alternate be a relevant and practical application of theories and concepts.

5. Minimum Requirements/Qualifications of Participants. Minimum qualifications of participants shall be based on standards acceptable to the tourism industry.

--- [Page 35] ---
Page 34 of 37
Ord. No. 0102-03
6. Industrial Staff: The instructional staff shall have thorough experience and knowledge on the subject matter and effective communication skills and teaching style.
7. Monitoring and Evaluation Procedures: The training program shall carry effective monitoring and evaluation tools.
8. Trainer Faculty: must have successfully completed the Trainer's Training Program of the Tourism Promotion Division, City Mayor's Office, Department of Tourism and for the Tourism Industry Board Foundation, Inc. In view thereof, the trainer must show proof that she/he has through experience and knowledge of the subject matter the ability to handle as well as effective communication skills and teaching style.
d. Homestay Sites: The following are the minimum requirements for the establishment, operation, and maintenance of homestay sites:
Homestay Sites:
1) There is prevailing peace and order situation in the area.
2) There is existing natural and human-made facilities in the community.
3) Site is easily accessible to tourists and surrounding transportation services, good road condition and other basic community infrastructure.
4) The host community is willing to join the National Homestay Program.
5) There is a deficiency of commercial accommodation facilities in the area to serve tourists.
Home Facilities:
1) Structures are of durable building materials and are in good presentable condition.
2) The surroundings are pleasant and beautiful.
3) There shall be at least one (1) adequately furnished guest room to accommodate paying visitors.
4) The following shall be available:
a) Bed and bedding (extra beds)
b) Adequate lighting system
c) Running water or if not available, adequate supply of water
d) Clean and well-maintained toilet and bathroom facilities
e) Meals at reasonable rates
f) Electrical power and means of ventilation
Training Workshop: Family members shall have completed the Tourism Promotion Division/Department of Tourism's training workshop on Homestay Program.
e. Rest Areas in Gasoline Stations: The following are the minimum requirements for the establishment, operation, and maintenance of rest areas:
1. Location: The locality and environment, including approaches shall be located along a major highway or road.
2. Parking: There shall be adequate parking area for customers.

--- [Page 36] ---
Page 35 of 37
Ord. No. 0102-03
3. Rest Room: There shall be a rest room with adequate, clean, and well-maintained toilet and washing facilities. Tissue paper, soap, hand paper towel shall also be provided.
4. Signage: There shall be a rest room signage visible from approaches which shall be well-illuminated at night.
5. Service and Staff: Adequate number of well-trained, properly groomed, efficient and courteous staff shall be employed. They shall wear clean uniforms at all times.
6. Gasoline Station: The gasoline station shall be clean and well-maintained.
7. Sandry Shop: There shall be an adequately stocked sandy shop, which shall be clean and well-maintained.
License Fee for Tourism-related Business, Trade or Occupation: There is hereby imposed the following license fee to be paid to the City Treasurer before the Tourism Promotion Division of the City Mayor's Office shall issue the corresponding permit or license to any business, trade or occupation that caters to tourists:
a. Hotel
1. Deluxe Class: P2,800.00
2. First Class: P2,900.00
3. Standard: P2,250.00
4. Economy: P2,000.00
b. Resort
1. Class AAA: F2,000.00
2. Class AA: F1,000.00
3. Class A: F800.00
4. Special Interest Class: F850.00
c. Tourist Inn/Apartments/Resort Houses/Motel and other similar facilities
1. With more than 100 unit lettable rooms: P1,500.00
2. With more than 51 unit lettable rooms: P1,200.00
3. With 50 or less lettable rooms: P1,000.00
d. Sauna Bath Parlors (for both Class A and B)
1. License fee per cubicle: P100.00
2. Inspection fee per cubicle: P10.00
3. Manager's license fee: P75.00
4. Massager, massage attendant, receptionist, checker, cashier, doorman, and other similar related positions: P5.00
e. Professional Congress Organizers: P500.00

--- [Page 37] ---
Page 36 of 37
Ord. No. 0102-03

1. Travel and tour services
P 1,000.00
a. Foreign or outbound tour operator
1,000.00
b. Local or inbound tour operator
1,000.00
2. Tour Guide
60.00
3. Tourist Transport bus
275.00
4. Coach
165.00
5. Van
120.00
6. Car
90.00
7. Ferry
1,000.00
8. Aircraft
1,000.00
g. Tourism-related establishments
1. First-class restaurant
P 700.00
2. Second-class restaurant
500.00
3. Third-class restaurant
500.00
4. Souvenirs, gifts & souvenir shops, department stores:
a) Class AAA
P 3,000.00
b) Class AA
2,000.00
c) Class A
1,000.00
5. Sports & recreational clubs, museums, training centers, historical sites, rest areas in provincial stations
P 350.00
6. Miscellaneous Fees: For tourism-oriented and tourism-related businesses, trade, or occupation, the following miscellaneous fees shall be imposed:
a. License certificate
P 40.00
b. Legal research fee
10.00
c. Filing fee
15.00
d. I.D fee (optional)
25.00
SECTION 3. Article 33 (Final Provision) of Ordinance No. 230, Series of 1991, otherwise known as the Tax Code of Davao City, as amended is hereby further amended, and shall now read as follows:

"Section 1. General Penal Provisions. Any person or persons who violate any provision of this Ordinance not herein otherwise covered by any special penalty or who shall otherwise violate the rules or regulations promulgated under Authority of this Ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding One Thousand Pesos (P1,000.00), or imprisonment not exceeding six (6) months, or both, at the discretion of the court.

PROVIDED, that the owner or manager or officer of the tourism-oriented or tourism-related business establishment or firm, or any person found violating the provisions of this Ordinance in the pursuit of their business shall be penalized by a fine of Five Thousand Pesos (P5,000.00), or imprisonment of six (6) months, in the first instance; and for each subsequent offense, Four Thousand Pesos (P4,000.00) without imprisonment."

--- [Page 38] ---
Page 37 of 37
Ord. No. 0102-03

SECTION 4. EFFECTIVITY: This Ordinance shall commence to take effect on the fifteenth (15th) day after its approval and publication in a newspaper of general circulation, and posting at the legislative hall or City Hall premises, and at the Agdao and Bankerohan Public markets.

Adopted, May 20, 2003 by a majority vote of the Members of the Sanggunian.

CERTIFIED CORRECT:

LOLITA C. GARCIA
Secretary to the Sanggunian, Panlungsod
(City Government Department Head II)

ATTESTED

EMMANUEL D. GALICIA, SR.
President Pro-Tempore
Acting Presiding Officer

APPROVED
AED 07 2003

RODEGO R. DUERTE
City Mayor

ATTESTED:

J. MELCHOR V. QUITAIN
Acting City Administrator
