=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 050-87 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
5th Legislative Body
43rd Regular Session
Series of 1987

Republica ng Pilipinas
LUNOYAN NG PAMBANGSA
Tunggapan ng Bagongayang Panlungsod
-00-
EXCEPT FROM THE MINUTES OF AND REGULAR SESSION OF THE
2nd Regular Meeting, City of Davao, The on Friday,
November 13, 1987.
PRESENT:
CIOH Rodolfo P. Duterte, Office of the Vice
Mayor
Councillor Antonio S. Casalito, Acting Councillor
Councillor Ruben V. Aberquez
Councillor Daniel G. Agno
Councillor Daniel C. Dela Cruz
Councillor Geronimo N. Malasayacan
Councillor Tomas Matevorda, Jr.
Councillor Juan M. Mabini
Councillor Luis N. Linsena
Councillor Teodulo F. Vega
Councillor Emilio A. Sotero
Councillor Juizwiminda C. Ilagan
Councillor Dante P. Escalante
Councillor Jose G. Sison
Councillor Jacinto S. Mullillar, Jr.
Councillor Rillo G. Chellera
Councillor Memerio L. Rasgo, Jr.
RECEIVED:
* * *
EXECUTION NO. 628
A proposed ordinance on anti-gormography as favorably recommended by the Committee on Laws and Ordinances was presented for consideration and appropriate action of the House of Councillors. Teodulo F. Vega, Chairman, Committee on Laws and Ordinances.
Councillor Teodulo F. Vega reminded the Members of the Body that the previous ordinance to this has been vetoed by His Honor, the City Mayor on the ground of exorbitant cost. The Committee on Laws and Ordinances refers the pertinent provisions of the Local Government Code.
He further informed the Members of the Body that after a series of public hearings conducted to this effect,

--- [Page 2] ---
Resolution No. 598
Ordinance No. 50
Series of 1937:
Continued
The Committee has finally drafted the said ordinance in view of many public clamor for the enactment of this ordinance in view of the proliferation of pornographic films shown in local downtown theaters.
His Honor, the Vice Mayor presented an amendment to the effect that under Section 11 of said ordinance a provision shall be inserted making mandatory for the City lawyer to cause the arrest of all persons who are in possession of the case of the guilty parties. The Vice Mayor manifested that without inserting this provi-
sion and as per experience with the prosecution of the showing of pornographic films, it would continue pending the resolution of the case. He further stated that as a lawyer, the prolongation of the case can be made depending upon the whims and caprices of the counsel concerned, while the showing of had films continuing.
On the other hand, the other members of the Body manifested that the insertion of this amendment would make the local Executive as the prosecutor and Judge at the same time. Then the said amendment was put into a vote, the motion was lost.
Councillor Dante P. Scalante proceeded further that in order to add more teeth or said ordinance, he proposed that Section 11 be eliminated and placed under sub-para-
graph C of Section 12 which will read as follows:
C) For the commission of Third offense, a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment of six months or both such of fine and imprisonment, at the discretion of the Court.
In case of commission of the third offense in ad-
dition to fine and imprisonment, the guilty person shall suffer permanent cancellation of his license. In addi-
tion the fine and imprisonment stated in the immediate preceding action, the judgment was accepted by the propellant.
After careful deliberation, on motion of Councillor Teodulo L. Vega, duly seconded by Councillor Dante P. Scalante, it was
RESOLVED, AS IT IS PASSED BY THE BODY, To approve an ordinance entitled:
ORDINANCE NO. 50
"AN ORDINANCE PROHIBITING THE SHOWING OF PORNOGRAPHIC FILMS AND SUCH OTHER FILMS UNAUTHORIZED FOR PUBLIC EX-
HIBITION AND REQUIREING ADMISSION TO ADULTS ONLY".

--- [Page 3] ---
Page 3

Resolution No. 598
Ordinance No. 50
Series of 1987
Continued:

Be it Ordered by the Sangguniang Panlungsod, City of Davao,
that:
SECTION 1. - This Ordinance shall be known as the
"Anti-Pornography" ordinance of the City of Davao.
SECTION 2. - The provisions of this Ordinance shall
be applicable within the entire territory and jurisdiction
of the City of Davao and shall be enforceable by the Office
of the City Mayor.
SECTION 3. - Except as otherwise provided, for the
purpose of this Ordinance, whenever any of the following
words or terms are used herein, or in any amendments hereto,
they shall have the same meaning ascribed to them in this
section;
(a) Board - The Movie and Television Review
and Classification Board created under Presidential Decree No.
1986;
(b) Persons - Means any individual, industry,
corporation, partnership, association, stock owner, trustee
or intemper of the theater or establisher, his agent or assignee;
(c) Motion Picture - A series of pictures
projected on a screen in rapid succession, with objects shown
to one another continuously changed so as to produce the opti-
cal effect of a continuous picture, which may move whether the
picture be black and white or colored silent or with accompaniment
of music or other medium and with whatever means
chosen or equipment they are projected upon a screen or other
material they are preserved or recorded for instant projection.
The term "motion picture" and the word picture is here used synonymously with motion pictures.
Continued on Page 4

--- [Page 4] ---
Resolution No. 599
Ordinance No. 50
Series of 1987
Continued:
(d) Television Broadcast - Public showing by transmitting sound or images by television or similar equipment, including cable television and other limited audience distribution;
(e) Theatrical Distribution - Public showing or exhibition of motion pictures in theaters, moviehouses, or any other places imposing admission fees to advance for entertainment, information and leisure;
(f) General Viewing - Refers to motion pictures made available to the general public for viewing, whether through public libraries, public lending clubs or similar organizations;
(g) General Preference - A classification of motion pictures designated to be shown to persons of all ages;
(h) Parental Guidance - A classification of motion pictures designated to parents on the delicate content of the film and the need for parental guidance in its appreciation;
(i) Restricted or R - A classification of motion pictures addressed to which is limited to adults. Adults are under eighteen (18) years of age or over;
(j) Not For Public Viewing or X - A classification of motion pictures designated by the Board for public exhibition or television broadcast;
(k) Television Preview - Any matter aired or broadcast on television indicating the availability of programs, product and service advertisements, teleplays, and motion pictures for sale or shown in moviehouses or elsewhere;
(l) Publicity Material - Any material applied to generate public interest in a

--- [Page 5] ---
Resolution No. 598
Ordinance No. 50
Series of 1987
Continued:
motion picture, including film
trailers, advertisement copies,
still photos, leaflets, posters
and billboards;
(m) Review - The process of examining motion
pictures, television programs,
publicity materials, and determining whether, using
the standards set by law, they are suitable for
transportation, production, copying,
distribution, sale, lease, exhibition,
or broadcast; the process include the determination as to what audience classification
the film may be exhibited.
(n) Pornography - As here used is synonymous with
obscenity the term "which" is
widely understood when applying contemporary community
standards, the dominant theme of
the material shall be whole
souls to unwhirl interest. This
includes patently offensive or de-
termining representations or descrip-
tions of sexual acts, whether
normal or inverted, actual or
simulated, including but not li-
mited to rape, incest, or oral sexual
intercourse; patently offensive representa-
tions of the genitals; and explicit
sexual exploitation of children.
SECTION 4. - No motion picture, television program
or related publicity material shall be available for thea-
trical distribution or exhibit or broadcast by television,
without prior permit issued by the Board after review of
the motion picture, television program or publicity ma-
terial.
SECTION 5. - The person or entity to whom a permit
has been issued by the Board shall use such permit only
for the purpose or purposes stated in it. He shall pre-
serve the integrity of the motion pictures, television
program, or related publicity materials in the conditions
they were approved, guarding against insertions in or
additions to them of unapproved matter.

--- [Page 6] ---
Renovation No. 598
Ordinance No. 50
Series of 1927
Continued:
SEC. 6. - Theatres and television studio owners
and their managers, as well as the operators of limited-
suffice cinemas shall:
(a) Exhibit only motion pictures, television
programs, related publicity materials and
certain other items. In case of television broadcast those kind
of audience cannot be controlled, only television programs provided by the Board mutu-
able for renewal preferences or with Re-
rental guidance may be broadcast.
(b) Any exhibition of films approved by the
Board shall be preceded by a short
announcement of the title and the
Board's classification of the film and
the fact that it has been approved by
the Board for public viewing.
(c) Theatre owner and theatre manager shall
renewable whether upon the approval
of the exhibition of films from the
board. The permit thus issued should
have the following requirements:
i. It should be authentic and bear
the seal of the Board.
ii. It should include the film cur-
rently shown in the theatre.
iii. It should point out the cut pas-
tions of the film as reviewed
by the Board.
iv. It should contain the film's
classification, whether for
general audiences or R, restric-
ted or N, etc.
(d) Maintain a three-foot high standee on the
theater lobby announcing the Board's
classification of the film. In case two
films are presented on floor features,
the restrictive classification shall
govern the announcement and the exhibition
into the theater.
Continued on Page 7-

--- [Page 7] ---
Page 7-7

Resolution No. 598
Ordinance No. 50
Series No. 1377

(e) In case of exhibition and other classes of exhibitions open to the public, the owners and their managers shall, in case the film being exhibited is for adults only, screen and refuse admission to persons under eighteen years of age, or in case the film is with parental guidance classification those twelve years of age and under, order the exclusion of such persons if, by some device, they have gained illegal entrance into the premises. In cases where the owner or his agent shall demand his residence certificate or other proof of age.

(f) Holders of approved permit and sign advertisements bearing the stamp of the Board shall, when using such signs, give the classification stated on then the Board's classification of the film.

SECTION 7. - Theatrical distribution by any person of pornographic films and such other films or motion pictures disapproved by the Board for public exhibition or television broadcast, including the use of publicity materials therefore, is strictly prohibited.

SECTION 8. - It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with any motion picture, television program, or publicity material previously approved by the Board in order to introduce, intercalate or insert any unapproved matter.

SECTION 9. - It shall be unlawful for any person below eighteen years of age to enter, to misrepresent or make use of any false evidence about his or her age in order to gain admission into a moviehouse or theater showing a motion picture classified as "Restricted" or "For Adults Only" by the Board. It shall be also unlawful for any employee of a moviehouse or theater to sell to, or receive from, another person known to the former.

--- [Page 8] ---
Page 5

Resolution No. 598
Ordinance No. 50
Series of 1967
Continued:

to be below eighteen years of age any admission ticket to
the exhibition of motion pictures classified "Restricted"
or "For Adults Only". In case of doubt as to be the age
of the person seeking admission, the latter shall be required
to exhibit his or her residence certificate or other proof
of age.

SECTION 10. - The Office of the City Mayor shall
constitute and organize such special committee whose head
and members he may designate from the City Fiscal's Office,
representative from the Sangguniang Panlungsod and repre-
sentative from the private sector. Such special committee
shall assist in the overseeing and implementation of this
Ordinance.

SECTION 11. - For the effective enforcement of the
provisions of this Ordinance, the Office of the City Mayor
or its duly authorized representative shall have the power
to inspect all public exhibitions or any motion picture or
publicity material in moviehouses, theaters and other
public establishments, and in any case, upon discovery of
any motion picture or publicity material which, although
previously approved by the Board has been tampered with to
introduce any unapproved matter, to immediately seize the
article containing or incorporating such unapproved matter
and to cause the prosecution of the person(s) responsible
for the violation of this Ordinance. Upon conviction of
the violator(s), the material seized as well as the other
proceeds or instruments of the crime shall be disposed of
in accordance with law.
Continued on Page 9

--- [Page 9] ---
Rescution No. 598
Ordinance No. 50
Series of 1987
Continued
SECTION 12. - Violation of any of the provisions of
this Ordinance shall be punished by:
(a) For the commission of first offense, a
fine of Five Hundred Pesos.
(b) For the commission of the second offense,
a fine of One Thousand Pesos.
(c) In case of commission of third offense
in addition to fine and imprisonment,
the guilty persons shall suffer permanent
cancellation of the business per-
mission for the time and
imprisonment stated in the immediate
preceding section.
SECTION 13. - This Ordinance shall take effect upon
its approval.
ENACTED: November 13, 1987.
CARRIED by a majority of 13 affirmative votes. Coun-
ciliors Tomas Monteverde, Jr., and Rene V. Galope were out when
the votes were taken.
APPROVED:
AMOROJO B. CASTILLO
City Councilor
Acting Presiding Officer
ATTESTED:
Arturo L. CAMOLO
Secretary
Sanggunian Unanggod
aba/asa
APPROVED:
12/11
, 1987
JAVINDO T. SUBILLAN, Jr.
Officer-in-Charge
Office of the City Mayor
ATTESTED
CONRADO A. ESRUARD
City Secretary
