=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance no. 000307-17 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
Republic of the Philippines
City of Davao
Office of the Sangguniang Panlungsod

18th City Council
41st Regular Session
Series of 2017

PRESENT:
Councillor Bonifacio E. Militar
Councillor Nilo A. Abelera Jr.
Councillor Maria Belen S. Acosta
Councillor Victoria U. Advincula Jr.
Councillor Bernard E. Alag
Councillor Edgardo A. Aquil Sr.
Councillor Conrad C. Baluran
Councillor Ma. Cherry Ann M. Bonguyan
Councillor Pilar C. Braga
Councillor Danilo C. Dayanghiang
Councillor Apolinar D. Dayap
Councillor Juanuyu N. Duteron
Councillor Edgar P. Itubayan Jr.
Councillor Leah A. Librado-Yap
Councillor Rene Elias L. Lopez
Councillor Avegayle Dalbado Ortiz
Councillor Josepina Dalbado-Castrodes
Councillor J. Melchor B. Quitain Jr.
Councillor Hallia Y. Sudagar
Councillor Mary Joseella D. Villafuerte
Councillor Jesus Joseph P. Zozobrado III

ON OFFICIAL BUSINESS:
Vice Mayor Paolo Z. Duterte
Councillor Al Ryan S. Alejandre
- Attended the "World Travel Mart" in London

ABSENT:
Councillor Joanne M. Bonguyan-Quilos - On Domestic Emergency Leave
Councillor Jimmy G. Dureza - On Sick Leave
Councillor Diosdado Angelo A. Mahipus Sr. - On Vacation Leave
Councillor Marissa P. Salvador-Abella - On Sick Leave

ORDINANCE NO. 0307-17
Series of 2017

AN ORDINANCE REQUIRING THE MANDATORY CONDUCT OF CULTURAL CONSULTATION/ORIENTATION ON THE PROPER USE OF INDIGENOUS PEOPLE (IP) TRADITIONAL ATTIRE DURING PARADES, EXHIBITS, GATHERINGS, PRESENTATIONS, AND OTHER RELATED PUBLIC ACTIVITIES RELATIVE TO THE APPROPRIATE AND CORRECT REPRESENTATION THEREOF PURSUANT TO THE MANDATORY CONDUCT OF CULTURAL CONSULTATION/ ORIENTATION ACT, R.O. NO. 69, ALSO KNOWN AS "THE INDIGENOUS PEOPLES' RIGHTS ACT OF 1997."

--- [Page 2] ---
Page 2 of 7
Ord. No. 0307-17

Be it ordained by the Sangguniang Panlungsod of Davao City in session assembled that:

ARTICLE I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

SECTION 1. TITLE - This Ordinance shall also be known as the "IP Attire Ordinance";

SECTION 2. DECLARATION OF POLICY: The City of Davao shall promote the culture and tradition of its eleven (11) tribes, and showcase their respective authenticity, especially during parades, exhibits, gatherings, presentations, and other related public activities. In pursuit of this goal and in the interest of the public, the City shall ensure that there are safeguard measures implemented to protect the rights of the Indigenous Peoples of cultural preservation and integrity, especially during public events;

SECTION 3. PURPOSE - The purpose of this Ordinance is to recognize, respect, preserve, and protect the cultural, religious, or social significance of every color, fabric, design, cut, and style embedded in all tribal attires of the Indigenous Peoples (IPs) / Indigenous Cultural Communities (ICCs) in Davao City which has or forms an integral part of the respective IPs' cultural identity and heritage;

SECTION 4. SCOPE - (a.) The application of this Ordinance shall be limited to any natural and juridical persons involved in the preparation, organization and performance of public events such as parades, exhibits, gatherings, and presentations, including but not limited to choreographers, instructors, managers, dancers, actors, dancers, singers, other performers, and artists who use colors, fabrics, designs, cuts, and styles symbolizing for claim to showcase, represent, symbolize the authentic Indigenous People attire and tradition of a particular tribe in Davao City;

(b.) This Ordinance does not apply to public and private events which showcase any form of creativity, using only cultural/native/ethnic-inspired themes that promote innovation in the field of art and ingenuity. However, the organizers and persons behind any cultural/native/ethnic-inspired gatherings or events are urged to exert earnest efforts to be consistent with the traditional IP attire and give due respect to the significance of every color, cut, and design of the same in accordance with the IP culture and tradition of the concerned ICC/IP used as inspiration for the theme of the event;

SECTION 5. DEFINITION OF TERMS:
1. Cultural Consultation/Orientation - refers to the certification or any document evidencing orientation and consultation issued and signed by the Office of Cultural Community Affairs under the Office of the City Mayor;

--- [Page 3] ---
Page 3 of 7
Ord. No. 0307-17

2. Indigenous Peoples (IPs)/ Indigenous Cultural Communities (ICC) - refer to the recognized tribes in Davao City namely Ata, Kagan, Klatu, Matigsalug, Obu-Manuvu, Tagalawa, Magindanon, Maranao, Sama, Ilocano, and Tausug duly acknowledged by the National Commission on Indigenous Peoples (NCIP) and National Commission for Muslim Filipinos (NCFM).

3. Related Public Activities - refer to activities such as public exhibits, school activities, street parades, public programs, filming, or any other activities which may involve the use, display, showcase, or illustration of IP Attire duly pertaining or attributable to a recognized IP community in Davao City.

4. IP Attire - are those clothing/wear/apparel including accessories and other paraphernalia commonly known to be used or are representation of a recognized Indigenous Peoples (IP)/ICC Community in Davao City as approved by the IP leaders, Council of Elders, etc., to be correct and appropriate in accordance with their tradition and practice.

5. Represent, Tribute, Showcase - portraying or exhibiting IP attire and/or other traditional instruments of a certain tribe intended to show gratitude, respect, or admiration of the represented tribe at a public gathering and/or event.

6. Tradition - the transmission of customs or beliefs of a particular culture, from one generation to another; the fact of being passed on in this manner. This includes attire, props, music, dance steps, instruments, etc.

ARTICLE II PRIOR CONSULTATION

SECTION 6. CERTIFICATE OF ATTENDANCE TO A CULTURAL CONSULTATION/ORIENTATION - Any person, group of persons, organization, entity, establishment, whether private or public, who seeks to use IP attire for the purpose of representing/exhibiting a recognized Indigenous People (IP)/ Indigenous Cultural Community (ICC) in Davao City during public activities and other public events shall secure a certification, or any document evidencing orientation and consultation issued and signed by the Office of Cultural Community Affairs under the Office of the City Mayor;

--- [Page 4] ---
Page 4 of 7
Ord. No. 0307-17

SECTION 7. CULTURAL ORIENTATION FOR KADAYAVAWAN AND ARAW NG DABAW: (a) The Office of the Cultural Community Affairs under the Office of City Mayor shall inform the Executive Committee (EXECOM) designated to supervise the overall activities of the Kadayawan and Araw ng Dabaw of the provisions of this Ordinance. The former shall also ensure that the applicants such as the choreographers, instructors, managers, supervisors, performers and other parties involved in the promotion and presentation of the IP Attire during the Kadayawan and Araw ng Dabaw, shall have undergone cultural orientation by requiring the presentation of a certification or any document evidencing orientation and consultation issued and signed by the Office of Cultural Community Affairs under the Office of the City Mayor;
(b) Unless otherwise provided, the cultural orientation for Kadayawan and Araw provided that it involves the same IP Attire/IP culture and the participating choreographers, instructors, managers, supervisors and other parties in the EXECOM who have undergone orientation/seminar is still the same. In case of change of choreographers, instructors, managers, supervisors and other parties involved in the promotion and presentation of the IP Attire for the Kadayawan and Araw, they must undergo cultural orientation/consultation;
(c) Furthermore, the participating choreographers, instructors, managers, supervisors, performers and other concerned parties are urged to deepen the integration of the knowledge acquired during cultural consultation/orientation to be likewise applied to IP dances, music and tradition being showcased/presented/exhibited during Kadayawan and Araw ng Dabaw;

SECTION 8. VALIDITY OF CULTURAL CONSULTATION - Upon proper orientation/community based consultation with the issuing IP community on the correct use of IP attire, the certification given to the applicant shall be valid for any related public activity organized/sponsored by him, provided it involves the same IP Attire previously sanctioned and unless otherwise revoked or suspended on valid grounds.

ARTICLE III
PROHIBITED ACTS

SECTION 9. PROHIBITED ACTS - It shall be unlawful for any person, groups of persons, organization, entity or establishment covered and referred to under Section 4 (a) of this Ordinance to commit the following acts:
a. Use of IP attire in any public activity without having undergone cultural orientation/consultation required under Sections 6 and 7 of this Ordinance as evidenced by a certification or any written document issued prior to the presentation;

--- [Page 5] ---
Page 5 of 7
Ord. No. 0307-17

b. Although having undergone cultural orientation, the applicant deviates/alters/varies from the original/authentic attire with respect to its color, design, cut, and style not in accordance with the proper attire agreed upon during the cultural consultation/orientation conducted by the tribal authority and the same is purely offensive to the IP community;

ARTICLE IV
PENALTIES

SECTION 10. PENALTIES – any person who commits any of the prohibited acts or violates any provisions of this Ordinance or its implementing rules shall be liable as follows:

a) First Offense – a warning/reprimand shall be issued upon the violator, and he/she shall be required to attend a cultural consultation/orientation seminar;

b) Second Offense – Fine of not less than P500.00 but not more than P1,000.00, at the discretion of the Court, and he/she shall be required to attend a cultural consultation/orientation seminar;

c) Third Offense – Fine of not less than P1,000.00 but not more than P2,000.00, at the discretion of the Court, and he/she shall be required to attend a cultural consultation/orientation seminar.

ARTICLE V
PROVISIONS FOR IMPLEMENTATION

SECTION 11. The Office of the Cultural Community Affairs under the Office of the City Mayor shall ensure the implementation of the provisions of this Ordinance. For this purpose, the aforementioned government agencies/offices are hereby mandated to perform the following functions:

a. To coordinate and ensure the active participation of the duly authorized representative of the concerned IP/JCC (based on their Indigenous Political Structure) accepted by the IP community through traditional decision-making consensus, who has a deeply-rooted knowledge of the cultural significance and propriety of their own IP attire/clothing/apparel for the purpose of conducting the cultural consultation/orientation before Kadayawan, Aravi ng Dabaw, and other citywide public events that showcase authentic IP attire and tradition mentioned under Sections 6 and 7 of this Ordinance;

--- [Page 6] ---
Page 6 of 7
Ord. No. 0307-17

b. To inspect any related public activities that involve the use of IP Attire and inquire if a certification was secured from them;

c. To confirm the authenticity of the certification of the IP Attire in accordance with Article II after inquiring as to the due execution and authentication of the appropriate issuing tribal authority;

d. To disseminate public information as to the appropriate, proper and correct use of IP Attire after consultation with the concerned IP/ICC (based on their Indigenous Political Structure) known to have a deeply-rooted knowledge of the cultural significance and propriety of their own IP attire/clothing/apparel;

e. To accept any complaints in violation of the cultural consultation/orientation conducted by the tribal authorities or any other violations of this Ordinance;

f. Perform other duties and functions including the issuance of rules and regulations as may be required for the effective implementation of this Ordinance.

ARTICLE VI
FINAL PROVISIONS

SECTION 12. SEPARABILITY CLAUSE - If any provision of this Ordinance or the application of such provision to any person or circumstances is declared unconstitutional, or inconsistent with national laws, the other unaffected provisions of this Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect;

SECTION 13. REPEALING CLAUSE - Any Ordinance, local issuances or rules and regulations inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed or modified accordingly;

SECTION 14. EFFECTIVITY - This Ordinance shall take effect fifteen (15) days following its publication in a newspaper of general circulation and its posting for three consecutive weeks at conspicuous places at City Hall.

ENACTED, November 7, 2017, by a unanimous vote of all the Members of the Sangguniang Panlungsod (City Government Department Head II)

CERTIFIED CORRECT:
Chariton Santos
Secretary to the Sangguniang Panlungsod
(City Government Department Head II)

--- [Page 7] ---
ATTESTED:
BONIFACIO MOLITAR
City Counselor
Temporary Presiding Officer
cns/clad

ATTESTED:
ATTY. ZULEIKA Y LOPEZ
City Administrator

Page 7 of 7
Ord. No. 0307-17
APPROVED: DEC 2 1 2017
