=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 000568-92_2870-568-92 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
10th City Council
3rd Regular Session
Series of 1952
Republica ng Pilipinas
LAWYER NG BAHAY
Tanggapan ng Sangguniang Panlungsod
-00-
EXCEPT FROM THE MINUTES OF THE REGULAR SESSION OF THE SANGUNIANG
PARLHESEED, CITY OF DAVAO, HELD ON MONDAY, OCTOBER 5, 1952.
PRESENT:
Vice Mayor Luis C. Bonayyan, Presiding Officer
Councillor Leonard R. Avila, III
Councillor Antonio M. Aragon
Councillor Antonio R. Vergara
Councillor Bonifacio E. Militar
Councillor Jose P. Delos Santos
Councillor Pilar C. Braga
Councillor Daniel B. Dayanghires
Councillor Antonio S. Castellano
Councillor Leonidas M. III
Councillor Diosdado A. Malapics
Councillor Jaiden Rodriques
Councillor Juan L. Valdez
Councillor Pedro R. Salvador
Councillor Romano F. Pilay
Councillor Agosto F. Ventas
Councillor Manuel M. Villalba
Councillor Jose Fl. Dalotes
Councillor Leonora T. Casabel
Councillor Jose M. Balderas
Councillor Pas C. Mata
Councillor Tofiglio M. Vasquez
Councillor Nazario K. Navarro, Jr.
ON OFFICIAL BUSINESS:
Councillor Aristote V. D. Albay - U.S.A.
ASSENT:
Councillor Tomas Monteverde, Jr.
RESOLUTION NO. 2870
A proposed Ordinance prohibiting the selling of immoral Dectrines, obscene publications and exhibitions and the showing of indecent shows and pornographic films and other films disapproved by the Committee on Exhibitions and regulating admission to movie houses, for which the Committee on Rules and Privileges recommended strongly for enactment, was presented for consideration and appropriate action by Councillor Bonifacio E. Militar, Chairman on Committee on Rules and Privileges.
Councillor Militar informed the Body that some two weeks ago during the executive conference among the members of the Body, His Honor, the City Mayor, intimated for the immediate passage of his proposed ordinance prohibiting the selling of immoral doctrines, obscene publications and exhibitions and the showing of indecent shows and pornographic films and such other films disapproved for public exhibition and contribute largely to social decay and destruction of moral values especially of the young factor of society.
Continued on Page -2-

--- [Page 2] ---
Page 2

Resolution No. 2073, Ordinance No. 25, series of 1956, cost: $4.

After careful deliberation, on motion of Councilor Bonifacio E. Milliter, duly seconded by Councilors Antonio H. Vergara, Pilar C. Braga, Paz C. Mata, Frances A. Robillo, Agosto F. Juantes and Teofilo M. Yamas, it was

RESOLVED, AS IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED, To approve an Ordinance entitled:

ORDINANCE NO. 568

AN ORDINANCE PROHIBITING THE SELLING OF IMORAL DOCTRINES, OBSCENE PUBLICATIONS AND EXHIBITIONS AND THE SHOWING OF INDECENT SHOTS AND PORNOGRAPHIC FILMS AND SUCH OTHER FILMS DISAPPROVED FOR PUBLIC EXHIBITION AND INSULATING ADMISSION TO MOVIE HOUSE.

Be it ordained by the Sangguniang Panlungsod, City of Davao, that:

SEC. 1. This Ordinance shall be known as the "Anti-Pornographic" ordinance of the City of Davao.

SEC. 2. The provisions of this Ordinance shall be applicable within the entire territory and jurisdiction of the City of Davao and shall be enforceable by the Office of the City Mayor.

SEC. 3. Except as otherwise provided, for the purpose of this Ordinance, whenever any of the following words or terms are used herein, or any amendments thereto, they shall have the same meaning ascribed to them in this section:

a) Board - The constituted City Anti-Smut, Movie and television review and Classification Board as contemplated by the Motion and Television Review and Classification Act, Republic Act No. 1956;

b) Persons - Means any individual, industry, corporation, partnership, association, firm or owner, lessee or manager of the theater or establishment, his agent or assigns;

c) Immoral Doctrines - Doctrines which are openly proclaimed or publicly expounded contrary to public morals;

d) Obscene Publications and Exhibitions - Means writings which tend to arouse or corrupt the mind of persons;

e) Indecent Shows - Means the exhibition of immoral plays, scenes, or acts above live or in file in theaters, fairies, clubs or in any other place;

f) Motion Picture - A series of pictures projected on a screen in rapid succession, with objects shown in successive positions slightly changed

--- [Page 3] ---
Page 3

Regulation No. 2070, Ordinance No. 25, series of 1982, cont'd.

so as to produce the optical effect of a continuous picture in which the objects move whether the picture be black and white or colored, or in any other medium and with whatever mechanism or equipment they are projected, and in whatever material they are preserved, preserved for future projection. The material in which the motion picture is contained, preserved or recorded forms part of the motion picture. The term film is here used synonymously with motion pictures;

a) Televised Broadcast - Public showing by transmitting sound or images by television or similar equipment, including cable television and other limited audience distribution;

b) Theatrical Distribution - Public showing or exhibition of motion pictures in theaters, movie houses, or any other place where such films are shown for entertainment, education, information and advertisement;

i) General Viewing - Refers to motion pictures made available to the general public for its viewing either through film pads or public reading clubs or similar organizations;

j) General Patronage or "PG" - A classification of motion pictures admission to which is open to persons of all ages;

k) Parental Guidance or "M" - A classification of motion pictures admission to which is limited to adults, adults, are persons eighteen (18) years of age or over;

l) Not for Public Viewing or "NR" - A classification of motion pictures admission to which is limited to adults;

m) Television Program - Any matter aired or broadcast on television including live and pre taped programs, product and service advertisements, teleplays, and motion pictures originally shown in movie houses or elsewhere;

n) Publicity Material - Any material employed to generate interest in the motion picture, including film trailers, advertisement copies, still photos, leaflets, posters and billboards;

--- [Page 4] ---
Page 4

Resolution No. 2570, Ordinance No. 700, series of 1993, cont'd.

p) Review - The process of examining motion pictures, television programs and related publicity materials and determining whether, using the standards set forth below, they are for exhibition, exploitation, promotion, advertising, distribution, sale, lease, exhibition, or broadcast by television. The process includes the determination of whether the material classifies the film may be exhibited.

q) Pornography - As here used is synonymous with obscenity the test of which is whether to the average person, applying contemporary community standards, the dominant theme of the material taken as a whole, is one of an indecent nature. This includes patently offensive or desecrating representations or descriptions of ultimate sexual acts, acts or persons, actual or simulated, including but not limited to, sexual acts involving anal or oral sexual intercourse; patently offensive representations, excretory functions and lewdness, lasciviousness, obscenity and explicit sexual exploitation of children.

SEC. 4. In consonance with Presidential Decree No. 969, the following shall be considered as prohibited acts:

1. Those who shall publicly expose or proclaim doctrines openly contrary to public morals;

2. a) The authors of obscene literature, published with their knowledge in any form; the editors publishing such literature; and the owners/proprietors of the establishment selling the same;

b) Those who, in theaters, fairs, cinematographs of any kind, shall exhibit indecent or immoral plays, scenes, acts or shows, whether live or in film, if such obscene literature or indecent or immoral plays, scenes, acts or shows, whether live or in film, are presented with the intent to: (1) glorify criminals or desecrate crimes; (2) serve no other purpose but to satisfy the market for violence, lust or perversion; (3) afford any race or religion; (4) tend to abet traffic in drugs, use of drugs, or prostitution; (5) are contrary to law, public order, morals, good customs, established policies, lawful orders, decrees and edicts.

3. Those who shall sell, give away or exhibit films, prints, engraving, sculpture or literature which are offensive to morals.

SEC. 5. No motion picture, television program or related publicity material shall be available for theatrical distribution or exhibit or broadcast by television, without prior permit issued by the Board after review of the motion picture, television program or publicity materials.

--- [Page 5] ---
Page 3

Resolution No. 2870. Ordinance No. 555, series of 1942, cont'd.

SEC. 6. The person or entity to whom a permit has been issued by the Board shall use such permit only for the purpose stated in it. He shall preserve the integrity of the motion pictures, television program, or related publicity materials in the conditions they were approved, guarding against insertions in or additions to them of unapproved matters.

SEC. 7. Movie houses and television studio owners and their managers, as well as the operators of limited audience cinemas shall:

a) Exhibit only motion pictures, television programs, related publicity materials owned or approved by appropriate Board permit. In case of television broadcast where kind of classification is not specified, the Board's classification and publicity materials classified by the Board as suitable for general patronage or with parental guidance may be broadcast.

b) Any exhibition of films approved by the Board shall be preceded by a short announcement on the screen of the film's classification, the classification of the film and the fact that it has been approved by the Board for public viewing.

c) Theater owner and their managers shall prominently display a copy of the permit to exhibit in front of the ticket office. The permit thus posted should have the following requisites:

i. It should be authentic and bear the seal of the Board,

ii. It should match the film currently shown in the movie house,

iii. It should point out the cut portions of the film as reviewed by the Board,

iv. It should contain the film's classification, whether for general patronage or G, parental guidance or F, restricted or X, etc.

d) Maintain a three-foot high standee on the theater lobby announcing the Board's classification of the film. If the film contains any offensive features, the more restrictive classification shall govern the announcement and the admission into the theater.

e) In case of movie house and other places of exhibition open to the public, the owners and their managers shall refuse admission to persons below Continued on Page 5.

--- [Page 6] ---
Page 6

Resolution No. 2570, Ordinance No. 20, series of 1972, cont'd.

eighteen years of age, or in case the film is with parental guidance classification those twelve years of age and below and order the exclusion of such persons from the premises. In case of doubt, the film exhibitor or his agent shall demand his residence certificate or other proof of age.

f) Holders of approved print and sign advertisements bearing the stamp of the Board shall, when using such advertisements, be required to state on them the Board's classification for the film.

SEC. 8.- Theatrical distribution by any person of pornographic films and such other films or motion pictures disapproved by the Board for public exhibition or television broadcast, including the use of publicity materials therefore, is strictly prohibited.

SEC. 9.- It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with any motion picture, television program, or publicity material previously approved by the Board in order to introduce, intercalate or insert any unapproved matter.

SEC. 10.- It shall be unlawful for any person below eighteen years of age to enter, to misrepresent or make use of any false evidence about his or her age in order to gain admission into, a movie house or theater showing a motion picture classified as "Restricted" or "For Adults Only." It shall be also unlawful for any employees of a movie house or theater to sell to, or receive from, another person known to the former to be below eighteen years of age any admission ticket to the exhibition of motion pictures classified "Restricted" or "For Adults Only." In case of doubt as to be the age of the person seeking admission, the latter shall be required to exhibit his or her residence certificate or other proof of age.

SEC. 11.- The Office of the City Mayor shall constitute and organise such special board whose head and members he may designate from the City Legal Office, representative from the Samungjang Film League and representative from the private sector. Such special Continued on Page 7.

--- [Page 7] ---
Page 7
Resolution No. 2870, Ordinance
No. 522, series of 1992, cont'd.
board shall assist in the overseeing and implementation of this
Ordinance.
SEC. 12. For the effective enforcement of the provisions
of this Ordinance, the Office of the City Mayor or its duly authorized
representative shall have the power to inspect all proclaimed doctrines
openly contrary to public morals, published obscene literatures, all
public exhibitions, shows or any motion pictures or publicity materials
in movie houses, theaters and other public establishments, and in any
case, upon discovery of any motion or publicity materials which,
although previously approved by the Board has been tampered with to
introduce any unapproved matter, to immediately seize the article
containing or incorporating such unapproved matter, and to cause the
prosecution of the person(s) responsible for the violation of this
Ordinance. Upon conviction of the violator(s), the materials seized
shall be disposed of in accordance with law.
SEC. 13. Violation of any of the provisions of this Ordinance
shall be punished by imposing the penalty of one year imprisonment
in accordance with Section 450 (iii) of Republic Act 7160, otherwise
known as the Local Government Code of 1991, and the permanent cancel-
lation or revocation of their business permits and/or franchises.
SEC. 14. This Ordinance shall take effect upon its approval.
ENACTED: October 5, 1992.
CABINAS, By a majority of seventeen (17) affirmative votes.
(Note: Commissioners Casablanca, Doler, Mahijuan, Abellana and Reta, III
were cut out when the votes were taken.)
APPROVED:
Luis C. Romayan
Vice Mayor II
President - Officer
ATTENDED:
AURELIO AREASALDO, JR.
Acting Sangguniang Panlungsod
Approved:
Ricardo M. Duran
City Administrator
City Secretary - Designate
Attended:
BENJAMIN C. DE SUMAN
City Administrator
City Secretary - Designate
