=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 000043-02 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
13th City Council
30th Regular Session
Series of 2002

Rendulka ng Pilipinas:
LUNGSGOD NG DABAW
Tanggapan ng Sangguniang Panlungsod

PRESENT:

Councillor Emmanuel D. Galicia, Sr.
Vice Mayor Luis C. Bonguyan, Presiding Officer
Councillor Nilo G. Abelera
Councillor Ma. Belen S. Aceota
Councillor Victorino M. Mantuala
Councillor Wilberto E. Al-ag
Councillor Alexis C. Almedras
Councillor Leonardo R. Avila, III
Councillor Gerald B. Bangoy
Councillor David A. Bautista
Councillor Damilo C. Dayaughirang
Councillor Shane L. Delor
Councillor Jimmy G. Dureza
Councillor Francies Mabuhay Lanan
Councillor Angelito M. Abrado
Councillor Liborio V. Lumain
Councillor Diosdado Angelo A. Malhipus, Sr.
Councillor Teresita Mata-Marathon
Councillor Bonifacio M. Militao
Councillor Juan J. Monroye, IV
Councillor Beethoven L. Orcullo
Councillor Myrna G. L'Daldo-Ortiz
Councillor Susan Isabel C. Reta
Councillor Dionerco B. Sampaga, Jr.
Councillor Isidro T. Ungub

ON OFFICIAL BUSINESS:

Councillor Isidro S. Calonia, Jr. - Toronto, Canada
Councillor Peter T. Lavina

ORDINANCE NO. 043-02
Series of 2002.

THE COMPREHENSIVE ANTI-SMOKING
ORDINANCE OF DAVAO CITY

Be it ordained by the Sangguniang Panlungsod of the City of Davao, in session assembled that

SECTION 1. TITLE: Be it ordained that this Ordinance shall be known as, "THE COMPREHENSIVE ANTI-SMOKING ORDINANCE OF DAVAO CITY";

--- [Page 2] ---
Page 2 of 6
Ord No 043-02

SECTION 2. COVERAGE: It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or allow smoking in a public utility vehicle, government-owned vehicle or any other means of public transport for passengers, accommodation and entertainment establishment, public building, public place as defined in Section 9 (e) herein, in any public place or in any area that is an exclusive private residence, private place of work owned by the government or duly designated smoking areas, within the territorial jurisdiction of Davao City.

SECTION 3. DEFINITION OF TERMS:

a. Smoking refers to the lighting and/or puffing of any lighted cigarette, cigar, tobacco or any other kind, form or type. Possession of any lighted cigarette, cigar, tobacco and the like within the prohibited areas for smoking shall constitute prima facie evidence as an act of smoking prohibited under this Ordinance;

b. Public Utility Vehicle refers to Public Utility Jeepsneys (PUJs), Public Utility Buses (PUBs), taxis, tricycles and other public utility vehicles used in the transport of passengers;

c. Accommodation & Entertainment Establishments refer to restaurants, fastfoods, eateries, hotels, motels, lodges, inns, boarding houses, disco houses, videoke bars, resto bars, and movie houses, or any other place with pleasant environment and atmosphere conducive to comfort, health, relaxation, rest, offering food, sleeping accommodation and recreational facilities to the public for a fee;

d. Public Building refers to any of the following:

(1) A building structure owned by the government or owned by a private person but used, rented or occupied by the government or any of its instrumentalities;

(2) Any building or structure used, or controlled exclusively for public purposes by any department or branch of government, local government unit or barangay without reference to the ownership of the building;

e. Public Place refers to gasoline stations, banks, malls, town squares, terminals, shopping/business arcades, schools, churches, hospitals, cinema houses, gymnasiums, funeral parlors, barber shops, and other similar places where people usually congregate either to while away their time or to listen or attend concerts, rallies, programs such as, but not limited to, Rizal Park, Freedom Park, Magaysay Park, Omenna Park, and the like;

--- [Page 3] ---
Page 3 of 6
Ord No 043-02

1. Designated Smoking Room refers to a delineated room inside the accommodation establishment, or public place or enclosed public place, which is totally enclosed where a person is allowed to smoke without violating this Ordinance.

Any duly designated room/area in accommodation and entertainment establishments whether tourism accredited or not, within the territorial jurisdiction of Davao City as hereinabove defined, provided, the following conditions are met:

(1) If the accommodation and entertainment establishment is air-conditioned, it must establish and designate a smoking room which shall not be more than 1/4 of the total accommodation area of the establishment that is air-conditioned and equipped with an exhaust fan and totally enclosed on all sides and separated from the rest of the premises where smoking is prohibited; and

(2) If the accommodation and entertainment establishment is not air-conditioned, it must establish and designate a smoking area which shall not be more than 1/4 of the total accommodation area of the establishment that is fully ventilated and separated from the rest of the premises where smoking is prohibited.

G. Enclosed Area refers to an area which is closed whether totally or partially at the sides and is roofed or make use of the flow above it as a ceiling, or even if open on all sides but is covered by a roof, permanent or temporary in nature.

h. Enclosed Public Place refers to a room, building, structure or edifice that is constructed with a shelter or covered by a roof with panels or concrete wall, which structure is open to the public.

SECTION 4. PROHIBITED ACTS The following acts shall be prohibited:

a. Smoking in any of the places enumerated in Section 2 hereof, except in duly designated smoking areas;

b. Knowingly allowing, ahetting, or tolerating smoking in accommodation establishments, whether tourism accredited or not, except when smoking is done inside or within the duly designated smoking areas referred to in this Ordinance;

c. Smoking while inside a government-owned or public utility vehicle whether moving or stationary or while solicitation of passengers is going on or while the vehicle is waiting for passengers.

--- [Page 4] ---
Page 4 of 6
Ord No. 043-02

SECTION 5. PERSONS LIABLE
The following persons/individuals are deemed liable under this Ordinance:

a. Any person smoking within the prohibited rooms, areas/establishments mentioned in Section 2 hereof;

b. Any passenger, driver, conductor, or inspector of government-owned vehicles or public utility vehicles (PUVs) smoking as stated in Section 4 (c) hereof;

c. The President or Manager in case of a company, corporation, or association or the owner/proprietor or operator in case of single proprietorship, of accommodation and entertainment establishments, whether tourism-accredited or not, who knowingly allows, abets or tolerates and/or fails to warn, advise or report violators of this Ordinance to any policeman or nearest police station within three (3) hours of the violation.

SECTION 6. The City Health Office and City Engineer's Office are tasked to inspect and certify the appropriateness of the designated smoking areas provided by accommodation establishments which whether tourism-accredited or not, taking into consideration the purpose of the law which is to protect non-smokers from the pernicious effects of tobacco smoke.

Sixty (60) days after the effectiveness of this Ordinance, the City Health Office in coordination with the Office of the Business Bureau shall conduct an ocular inspection of all non-accredited tourism establishments in Davao City to determine compliance with the requirements of this Ordinance.

For tourism-accredited accommodation and entertainment establishments, the ocular inspection shall be conducted by the City Health Office in coordination with the City Tourism Office and the Office of the Business Bureau.

A period of sixty (60) days shall be given to the management of the accommodation and entertainment establishment to comply with the requirements of this Ordinance. Non-compliance with the requirements set forth in this section shall be a ground for cancellation of the business permit by the Office of the Business Bureau.

SECTION 7. Violators of this Ordinance shall be subject to a fine of not less than PHP 500.00 nor more than PHP 2,000.00 or imprisonment of not less than one (1) month nor more than six (6) months or both, at the discretion of the Court, except for Paragraphs 2 & 3 hereunder.

--- [Page 5] ---
Page 5 of 6
Ord No 043-02

(1) In cases of establishments which do not opt to declare their establishment as totally free from smoking but fails to provide the appropriate designated smoking area as certified by the City Health Office and City Engineer's Office within the 60-day period specified in Section 6 hereof, their business permit may be revoked;

(2) In cases where there is failure to warn or advise would-be violators of this Ordinance, or failure to report violators as required in Section 5(c) hereof or smoking is allowed, abetted or tolerated in establishments in violation of this Ordinance, a penalty shall be imposed upon the President or Manager in cases of corporations, partnerships or associations, or the owner, proprietor or operator in cases of single proprietorship, whether tourism- accredited or not as follows:

First Offense - PhP 300.00 or 1 month imprisonment or both at the discretion of the court
Second Offense - PhP 500.00 or 2 months imprisonment or both at the discretion of the court
Third and subsequent offenses - PhP 1,000.00 or 4 months imprisonment or both at the discretion of the court

(3) For drivers/passengers of Public Utility Vehicles (PUVs)
First Offense - PhP 100.00 or 1 month imprisonment or both at the discretion of the court
Second Offense - PhP 300.00 or 2 months imprisonment or both at the discretion of the court
Third Offense - PhP 500.00 or 3 months imprisonment or both at the discretion of the court

(4) Three (3) violations of this Ordinance shall be a ground for cancellation of the establishment's business permit

SECTION 8. POSTING OF BILLBOARDS The City Engineer's Office is hereby tasked to put up billboards in a conspicuous place in the City to notify the public of the restrictions, sanctions, and penalties provided in the Ordinance.

SECTION 9. The Philippine National Police (PNP) is tasked with the proper and vigorous implementation of this Ordinance

--- [Page 6] ---
Page 6 of 6
Ord No. 043-02

SECTION 10. SEPARABILITY CLAUSE
If, for any reason or reasons,
any part or provision of this ordinance shall be declared unconstitutional or
invalid, other parts or provisions thereof not affected shall continue to be in full
force and effect.

SECTION 11. REPEALING CLAUSE
All existing Anti-Smoking
Ordinances are hereby repealed.

SECTION 12. EFFECTIVITY CLAUSE
This Ordinance shall take effect
sixty (60) days after its approval and publication in a newspaper of local
circulation consistent with the provision of the Local Government Code, as
amended.

ENACTED, July 30, 2002 by an unanimous vote of all the Members of the
Sangguniang Panlungsod.

CERTIFIED CORRECT:
LOLITÁ C. GARCIA
Secretary to the Sangguniang Panlungsod
(City Government Department Head II)

ATTESTED:

EMMANUEL D. GALICIA, SR.
President Pro Tempore
Acting Presiding Officer
/ / \
APPROVED: AEE 1 ZH2, 2002

ROBERTO DUTERTE
City Mayor

ATTESTED:

LEO G. DELOS SANTOS
City Administrator
