=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 0112-14 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
Republic of the Philippines
City of Davao
Office of the Sangguniang Panlungsod

17th City Council
7th Regular Session
Series of 2014

PRESENT:

Councillor Bernard E. Al-ag
Councillor Nilo M. Abellera Jr.
Councillor Ma. Belen S. Acosta
Councillor Victorio O. Advincula Jr.
Councillor Antonio B. Bandeira
Councillor Leonardo R. Avila III
Councillor Karlo S. Bello
Councillor Joanne M. Bongayuan Quilos
Councillor Louise John J. Bongayuan
Councillor Maricel A. Dayanghiring
Councillor April Mendiola
Councillor Edgar R. Duyan Sr.
Councillor Leah A. Librado-Yap
Councillor Rene Elias C. Lopez
Councillor Manuel A. Mahipus Sr.
Councillor Berino L. Mambo Sr.
Councillor Bonifacio E. Militar
Councillor Tomas J. Monteverde IV
Councillor Antoniette G. Principe-Castrodes
Councillor Marissa P. Salvador Abeilia
Councillor Mercy Joselle D. Villafuerte

ON OFFICIAL BUSINESS:

Vice Mayor Paola Z. Duterte
Councillor Myrna G. L'Dalado-Ortiz

ABSENT:

Councillor Jimmy G. Dureza
Councillor January N. Duterte
Councillor Rachel P. Zozobra

ORDINANCE NO. 0112-14
Series of 2014

AN ORDINANCE CREATING THE DAVAO CITY PHYSICAL
FITNESS AND SPORTS DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL (DCFFSDC)

He it ordained by the Sangguniang Panlungsod of Davao City in session
assembled that:

--- [Page 2] ---
Page 2 of 6
Ord No. 0112-14

SECTION 1. TITLE - This Ordinance shall be known as "AN ORDINANCE CREATING THE DAVAO CITY PHYSICAL FITNESS AND SPORTS DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL [DCFPSDC]";

SECTION 2. DECLARATION OF POLICY - It is policy of the City to promote physical education and sports to foster fitness, self-discipline, camaraderie, healthy living and teamwork among the citizens, discover and assist local potentials in different sports competitions or events, through a local sports network which shall act as the citywide organizational network, with different sectors in the implementation of this Ordinance and encourage wide participation of the public and private sectors in formulating the policies and set the priorities and direction of the local government's sports promotion and development. Aside from the effort to discover potential talents and the promotion of traditional sports, the policy of the City Government is to mold individuals to become physically and mentally fit citizens of the nation by instilling sports in their system. Sports is an effective means to counter drugs and other menaces infecting the youth. Therefore, the City Government of Davao must manifest its willingness and commitment to be at the forefront of sports development and promotion with the private sector as a partner in the success of the sports development program of the City of Davao.

SECTION 3. CREATION - There is hereby constituted a Davao City Physical Fitness, Sports and Youth Development Council (Hereinafter known as "DCFPSDC" or the "Council") which shall act as the Citywide organizational network, based on the Executive, Legislative, and Planning information dissemination, and actual implementation and monitoring of policies and programs of "sports for all" and youth development.

SECTION 4. COMPOSITION - The Davao City Physical Fitness, Sports and Youth Development Council shall be composed of the following:

1. CHAIRPERSON
City Mayor

2. CO-CHAIRPERSON
Officer In Charge
Sports Development Division
City Mayor's Office

3. VICE-CHAIRPERSON
To be appointed by the Mayor from Private Educational Institutions

4. Members from the Government Sector
a. City Director
City DILG

b. Chairperson, SP Committee on Education, Science and Technology, Arts and Culture or his/her duly authorized representative;

c. Chairperson, SP Committee on Youth and Sports Development or his/her duly authorized representative;

--- [Page 3] ---
Page 3 of 6
Ord No. 0112-14

d. Chairperson, SP Committee on Cultural Communities and Muslim Affairs or his/her duly authorized representative
e. President of Liga ng mga Barangay or his/her duly authorized representative
f. Department Head of the Barangay Cultural Communities Affairs and Development Office or his/her duly authorized representative
g. Head, Physical Fitness and Sports Development, Department of Education or his/her duly authorized representative
h. Chairperson, SP Committee on Women, Children and Family Relations or his/her duly authorized representative
i. Chairperson, SP Committee on Social Services or his/her duly authorized representative

5. Members selected and appointed by the City Mayor from the Private Sector
a. One (1) representative from the Media or his/her duly authorized representative
b. One (1) representative from the National Sports Associations or his/her duly authorized representative
c. One (1) representative from the Youth Sector or his/her duly authorized representative
d. One (1) representative from the Private Schools or his/her duly authorized representative
e. One (1) representative from the Business Sector or his/her duly authorized representative
f. One (1) representative from the Persons with Disabilities Sector or his/her duly authorized representative

SECTION 5. POWERS AND FUNCTIONS - The Davao City Physical Fitness, Sports and Youth Development Council (DCFFSYDC) shall exercise the following functions and responsibilities with the concurrence of the Chairperson:
1. Meet at least once a month and plan and formulate a short, medium and long term blue print of sports and youth development programs based on the policy and program of "SPORTS FOR ALL" with a primordial focus on the youth welfare and development, and including a well synchronized year round calendar of events and activities culminates in a national/international sports competition.

--- [Page 4] ---
Page 4 of 6
Ord No. 0112-14

2. Prepare a local "Sports and Youth Summit" in consultation with other public and private entities concerned to identify and prioritize sports programs and activities in their respective localities and areas of concern and to monitor, review, and validate their programs.

3. Formulate a plan to organize and conduct an Annual Sports Festival for the City which shall culminate with the Sports Awards and Recognition Night with the concurrence of the chairperson. Recommend to the Chief Executive to provide incentives, recognition and awards to deserving athletes, coaches, trainers, and other persons or entities involved in or supporting sports development.

4. Oversee and assess the implementation of the physical fitness and sports program and activities in the city.

5. Establish a database and disseminate proper information on the policies and programs to encourage the active participation of their constituents on physical fitness and sports activities.

6. Formulate a program or mechanism to assist in the identification, recruitment, and training of gifted and talented athletes and youth leaders or representatives who will represent Davo City in the regional, national, and international competitions, or who are potential leaders of our city or nation in the future.

7. Prepare the plan in establishing, developing, and maintaining a fully equipped publicly funded sports facilities and centers within strategic places in the City, adequate for major national and international competitions.

8. Establish a database of all recognized sports organizations, athletes, coaches, and trainers in the city, as well as request all sports organizations to secure voluntary recognition from the council.

9. Issue the regulations and guidelines for all sports events conducted in the City and ensure that proper measures are taken up by all organizers to ensure proper and necessary training and preparation of athletes, the safety and protection of the welfare of participants, including the release of permits for the conduct of any sporting event and the inspection of all sporting events in the city to ensure compliance with the rules, regulations, and guidelines issued by the Davo City Sports Development Division, which shall include, but not limited to, the following: (a) the regulation of all sporting events involving qualified other sports or tribal sports recognized by the Davo City Sports Development Division, in accordance with other existing ordinances;

10. Submit the plans, programs, and projects with the corresponding budget proposals including the funding requirement for the operation and maintenance of the Council, for the consideration of the Head of the Sport Development Division in integrating the budget proposal of the council under the Sport Development Office;

--- [Page 5] ---
Page 5 of 6
Ord No. 0112-14

11. Perform other functions deemed necessary to promote and implement the Policies and Programs of the City;
12. Establish linkages and call on other public or private entities or individuals for assistance, support, and funding;

SECTION 5. CONCERTED SUPPORT: All heads of the departments or offices of the City Government of Davao and other national agencies are hereby directed to support the programs and activities of the Davao City Physical Fitness, Sports and Youth Development Council. The Davao City Sports Development Division shall be the Primary Agency tasked to implement this Ordinance and the issuances of the Council;

SECTION 7. BASIC RULES OF PROCEDURE OF THE COUNCIL

1. Majority of the members of the Council, including the Vice-Chairperson, shall constitute a quorum;
2. The Chairperson shall preside over the council meetings. Rulings of the Chairperson shall not be regarded as a concurrence;
3. Only the Members of the Council, excluding the Chairpersons and Vice-Chairperson, may authorize a person in writing to represent the members in a meeting. A written notice of the authority to represent must be given to the Council, through the person presiding, otherwise, the representative shall be excluded from a council meeting;
4. In the absence of the Mayor, the Co-Chairperson shall exercise his authority as Chairperson, otherwise he shall be relegated to the status of an observer but may participate in the discussions in the meeting and may not vote;
5. In the absence of the Chairperson and Co-Chairperson, the Vice-Chairperson shall preside over council meetings. However, the authority to concur on the issuances of the Council shall remain with the Chairpersons;
6. The Vice-Chairperson and members shall have one vote each. The Vice-Chairperson, in the absence of the Chairpersons, may also vote during council meetings;

SECTION 8. HONORARIAS AND EXPENDITURES: The committee shall be provided with sufficient funds for the full operationalization of the Council and the implementation of sports development program. Subject to availability of funds and usual accounting and auditing requirements, the Council members may be authorized to receive honoraria to be determined by the Council and approved by the City Mayor;

--- [Page 6] ---
Page 6 of 6
Ord No. 0112 14
SECTION 9. SEPARABILITY PROVISIONS - If any part or provision of this Ordinance shall be invalidated for being contrary to existing laws, no other part, section or provision hereof shall be affected thereby;
SECTION 10. EFFECTIVITY - This Ordinance shall take effect after publication of the same in a newspaper or general circulation;
ENACTED, February 18, 2014, by a majority vote of all the Members of the Sanggunian present.
CERTIFIED CORRECT;
CHARITO N. SANTOS
Secretary to the Sangguniang Panlungsod (City Government Department Head II]
ATTESTED:
BERNARD E. M.AQ
President Pro Tempore
Temporary Presiding Officer
APPROVED: APR 1 4 2014
RODRIGO R. DUTERTE
City Mayor
ATTESTED:
ATTY. J. MELCHOR V. QUITAIN
City Administrator
