=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 002017-94_6652-2017-94 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
19th City Council
6th Regular Session
Series of 1994

Republika ng Pilipinas
LUNGSOD NG DABAW
Tanggapan ng Sangguniang Panlungsod
=03=

EXCERPT FROM THE MINUTES OF THE REGULAR SESSION OF THE SANGUNIANG PANLUNGSOD, CITY OF DAVAO, HELD ON FRIDAY, MAY 13, 1994.

Present:

Vice Mayor Luis C. Bongayan, Presiding Officer
Councilor Aristeo V. Delaibay
Councilor Nilo G. Aseller
Councilor Antonio H. Vergara
Councilor Bonifacio E. Militar
Councilor Antonio M. Pascual
Councilor Pilar C. Braga
Councilor Murales A. Librado
Councilor Ramon L. Yagapdhangirang
Councilor Tomas Monteverde, Jr.
Councilor Antonio S. Castillo
Councilor Cornelio C. Reta, III
Councilor Jose P. Villanueva
Councilor Jaime Q. Rodriguez
Councilor Henita R. Orcullo
Councilor Pedro M. Valverde
Councilor Agustino B. Play
Councilor Agosto P. Fuentes
Councilor Frances A. Robello
Councilor Maria J. Cabral
Councilor Shane L. Dalor
Councilor Paz C. Mata
Councilor Tyrna L.Dalco-Ortiz
Councilor Cesareo C. Cabaling

On Official Business:
Councilor Teofilo M. Venus

Absent:
Councilor Nazario K. Navarro, Sr. - On leave

RESOLUTION NO. 6652

A resolution proposing to enact an ordinance granting incentives to new and existing enterprises, was presented for consideration and appropriate action of the Body by Councilor Cornelio C. Reta, III.

Councilor Agosto P. Fuentes presented an amendment to the effect that it should be 3 years instead of 5 years from the start of commercial operations. All registered enterprises under this Code shall be fully exempt from the Mayor's permit fees, building permit fees, business sales tax and other fees and charges imposed under existing City Ordinances and to delete Items 4 and 5 thereof. The amendment was accepted by the proponent.

--- [Page 2] ---
**Resolution No. 6652
Ordinance No. 2017
Series of 1994
Continued**

In session duly assembled, the following resolution was adopted:

WHEREAS, many developing countries have adopted compensating investment codes or other investment incentive laws for several reasons, with intent of encouraging and promoting increased private investments, both domestic and foreign, especially Foreign Direct Investment (FDI), removing thereby the numerous forces that distort the market;

WHEREAS, most countries provide specialized incentives for exporters to offset anti-export biases, resulting from trade barriers and other policy distortions, and to place them on equal footing with their competitors operating in other countries with less distorted economic environments;

WHEREAS, investment incentives legislation is a global trend offered by developing economies as a means of offsetting and integrating domestic economies with the global economy, resulting in incentives increasingly being harmonized and standardized over international boundaries; while incentive grants are pre-privacies of the Sanguinagüan Law of Dec. 15 of R. No. 7505, the Local Government Code of 1997;

WHEREAS, foreign investors, in particular, will seek to ensure that they enjoy the same rights under laws as domestic investors, particularly in terms of economic regulations and the impact of others;

WHEREAS, it is the ardent desire of the Davao City Government and her inhabitants to place Davao City in a better economic, financial, and social position and a better place to live in under the "Invest-in-Davao" Project, and this is possible only through improved economic activities arising from the establishments of more investments, domestic or foreign;

WHEREAS, Davao City has become the center for the next ASEAN Growth Polygon in Mindanao, while she is also a member of the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), for development assistance, and therefore, opening doors to investors, and investors will be lured only through attractive beneficial and feasible incentives;

WHEREFORE, in the light of the foregoing compelling reasons, and after careful deliberation, on motion of Councilor Cornelio C. Bata, III, duly seconded by Councilors Pilar C. Breago and Paz C. Matea, and with the concurrence of the other members co-signed by Councilors Antonio S. Castille, Aristeo V. Alfar, Pablo G. Braga, Agosto F. Fuentes, Banilio C. Dayanghihing, Paz C. Mata, Blossado A. Malipius and Francesca A. Abellillo, it was

RESOLVED, AS IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED, That the Sanguinagüan Panlungsod of Davao City enacts an ordinance granting incentives to invest under the "Invest-in-Davao" Project, entitled: ORDINANCE NO. 2017 AN ORDINANCE ENACTING THE DAVAO CITY INVESTMENT INCENTIVE CODE OF 1994, AND FOR THEIR PURSES, Continued on Page -2-

--- [Page 3] ---
Page 3

Resolution No. 5652
Ordinance No. 2017
Series of 1994
Continued :

Be it Ordered by the Sangguniang Panlungsod, City of Davao, that:

CHAPTER I. TITLE AND DECLARATION OF POLICY

SECTION 1. - Title - This ordinance shall be known and cited as the DAVAO CITY INVESTMENT INCENTIVE CODE OF 1994.

SECTION 2. - Declaration of Policy. - To accelerate the sound development of Davao City in accordance with the updated city development plan and the national development plan for the year 2000, it is hereby declared to be the policy of the City of Davao to encourage new investments or expansions/diversification in agri-business activities like vacuum, dehydrated and spray-dried fruit processing, canned specialty vegetables, etc.; tourism facilities like midrange hotels, beach and mountain resorts; transhipment facilities including, but not limited to, port infrastructure and common bonded warehouses; miscellaneous light manufacturing activities such as garments, footwear, bulky housewares, kitchenware, etc.; property development such as the establishment of a private industrial estate; and such other preferred areas of investment as may be determined from time to time, which will provide employment opportunities, raise the standard of living of the people of Davao City, and provide for an equitable distribution of wealth.

The City of Davao welcomes and encourages domestic and foreign capital to establish enterprises that would utilize substantial amount of labor, raw materials and natural resources of the City, and thereby develop the socio-economic life in Davao City.

It is further declared to be the policy of the City to promote the establishment and operation of non-government organizations to serve as active partners in achieving local autonomy.

CHAPTER II. DAVAO CITY INVESTMENT INCENTIVE BOARD

SECTION 3. - The Davao City Investment Incentive Board. - There is hereby created a Davao City Investment Incentive Board Continued on Page 4.

--- [Page 4] ---
Page 4

Resolution No. 6652
Ordinance No. 2017
Series of 1994
Continued

(DCIIIB) to implement the provisions of this Code.

SECTION 4. - Composition of the Board. - The Board shall be composed of the following:

Chairman
Vice-Chairman
Members
Chairman, SP Public Works and Public Utilities Committee
Chairman, SP Urban Planning & Economic Development Committee
Chairman, SP Finance, Ways & Means Committee
Chairman, SP Trade, Commerce and Industry Committee
Chairman, SP Rules and Privileges Committee
City Administrator
City Planning and Development Coordinator
Department of Trade and Industry Representative
Two (2) Private Sector Representatives

Provided, that membership of the Board may be increased by the Sangguniang Panlungsod through the recommendation of the Board as it may deem necessary for the effective implementation of the provisions of this Code; Provided, further, that the representative of the Department of Trade and Industry and the two (2) Private Sector Representatives shall be appointed by the City Mayor, upon the recommendation of the sectors or entity they represent: Pro-

--- [Page 5] ---
Page 5

Resolution No. 6552
Ordinance No. 2017
Series of 1994
Continued:

voted finally, that the term of office of the private sector representative shall be two years, unless otherwise earlier revoked.

SECTION 5. Meetings and Quorum of the Board. The Board shall meet at least once every quarter or as often as may be necessary; on such day and time as it may fix. The presence of at least a majority of its members shall constitute a quorum and a majority of the quorum of a meeting, validly held, shall be required for the Board to exercise its powers and perform its functions.

SECTION 6. Powers and Functions of the Board. The primary function of the Board shall be to establish a favorable and stable policy on business climate which will encourage and support private sector investment and in the operation of business activities consistent with the development needs of Davao City. Pursuant to this, the Board shall be vested with the following powers:

(a) To promulgate the governing Implementing Rules and Regulations in the implementation of the provisions of this Code, subject to the approval of the City Council;

(b) To commission economic and technical research for the purpose of identifying priority investment areas and/or activities to be promoted as well as appropriate incentives and support measures which may be extended to new investors, to attract investment into these areas and/or activities;

(c) To adopt a short and medium-term investment promotion program, which shall specify the list of priority investment areas and/or activities and corresponding incentives and support measures to be used to attract targeted investments;

(d) To designate the Davao City Investment Promotion Center to be a Secretariat and to consequently supervise and administer operations specifically in the implementation of the provisions of this Code;

(e) To secure additional funding and other resources to supplement the budgetary support.

--- [Page 6] ---
Page 6

Resolution No. 6552
Ordinance No. 2017
Series of 1994
Continued

provided by the Davao City Government for the operation of the Secretariat in its implementation of the Code;

(r) To enter into any agreement with other government agencies and/or private sector organizations for the purpose of simplifying systems, procedures and requirements on investments and business operations in Davao City.

CHAPTER III. DEFINITION OF TERMS

SECTION 7. - Definition of Terms. - When used under this Code, the following terms and phrases shall mean as follows:

(a) "Board" shall refer to the Davao City Investment Incentive Board created under this Code.

(b) "City" shall mean the City of Davao covering all the areas within its territorial jurisdiction as provided for by law and its charter.

(c) "Code" shall refer to the "Davao City Investment Incentive Code of 1994".

(d) "Existing establishments/enterprises" shall refer to those establishments/enterprises which are in operation or production and located within its territorial jurisdiction of Davao City.

(e) "Local Personnel/Workers" shall refer to those workers or personnel who are bona fide residents of Davao City.

(f) "New investors/enterprises" shall refer to those prospective investors who have not yet established their place of operation or type of business in Davao City and is intended to establish its places of operation or production in the City.

(g) "Preferred Areas of Investments" shall mean the economic activities that the Board shall have identified and approved each after a thorough study and evaluation.

(h) "Registered enterprises" shall mean those enterprises/fundries registered in accordance with the provisions of this Code.

CHAPTER IV. PRIORITY INVESTMENT AREAS/ACTIVITIES AND APPROPRIATE INCENTIVES AND SUPPORT MEASURES

SECTION 8. - Priority Investment Areas - A list of priority Continued on Page 7

--- [Page 7] ---
**Resolution No. 6592
Ordinance No. 2017
Series of 1994**

---

areas and activities to be promoted to targeted investors shall be drawn up by the Board, based on findings and recommendations of economic and technical research commissioned for the purpose, and in consultation with other government and private sector leaders of Davao City. The board shall adopt the list for implementation under the Davao City Investment Program, with the concurrence of the Sangguniang Panlungsod.

SECTION 9. - Appropriate Incentives and Support Measures.
The Board shall identify and recommend for the approval of the Sangguniang Panlungsod appropriate incentives and support measures which it shall be willing to extend to targeted investors, to promote priority investment areas and activities.

SECTION 10. - Effectivity of Appropriate Incentives and Support Measures.
The Board shall review the package of appropriate incentives and support measures every two (2) years, provided that the Board may remove an area or activity from the list at any point when it deems that sufficient investments in the area or activity have been attained and where continued extension of incentives or support measures for the expansion of said area or activity may place the interest of the City and the public in adverse position. The Board may also revoke an investment area or activity from the list where it is convinced that investments in such area or activity in Javao City cannot be attracted within reasonable cost or may result in unfavorable business climate.

CHAPTER V. REGISTRATION OF ENTERPRISES

SECTION 11. - Qualifications of a New Enterprise.
New investors who intend to avail of the incentives provided for in this Code must meet the following qualifications:
(a) That the business enterprise must have complied with all the requirements mandated under existing laws and regulations.

--- [Page 8] ---
Resolution No. 6622
Ordinance No. 2017
Series of 1994
Continued:
local and national laws and the Constitution.
(b) That the prospective investor's place of operation or production be located within the territorial jurisdiction of Davao City.
(c) That the prospective investors must engage in activities in preferred areas of investments as may hereafter be declared by the Board.
(d) The new enterprise must have a capitalization of Ten Million pesos but less than Twenty Million pesos in case of a small-scale enterprise; at least Ten Million pesos in case of an expansion/diversification medium-scale enterprise; and at least Forty Million pesos in case of a large industry. Provided, that the amount of capitalization shall be based on the total project cost as stated in the investor's project study submitted to and approved by the Board.
(e) That the new enterprise will provide out of the labor force an employment of no less than ten (10) persons for every five (5) employees of a small-scale enterprise; at least twenty-five (25) persons for every fifty (50) employees of a medium-scale enterprise; and at least one hundred (100) persons for every large industry who are bona fide residents of Davao City.
SECTION 12. - Qualifications of an Existing Enterprises.
An existing enterprise may avail of the incentives under this Code provided that it meets the following qualifications:
(a) That the business enterprise must have complied with all the requirements of the existing local and national laws and the Constitution.
(b) That the expansion/diversification must engage in activities mentioned in Section 2 hereof or in other preferred areas of investments as may hereafter be declared by the Board.
(c) That the existing enterprise whose place of operation or production is already located with- in the territorial jurisdiction of Davao City, but which will undertake any of the following activities/projects:
(i) Relocate its principal office from other places in the Philippines to Davao City;
(ii) Expand its existing production capacity by constructing new buildings and other civil works for the installation of new machinery and equipment or improvements thereof which will result in an increase in production capacity.
Continued on Page 9.

--- [Page 9] ---
Page 3

Resolution No. 6552
Ordinance No. 2017
Series of 1994
Continued

(d) That the expansion/diversification shall have
a capitalization of at least One Million pesos but less than Ten Million pesos in case of a
small-scale enterprise; at least Twenty Million pesos but nor more than Forty Million pesos in case of a medium-scale enterprise; and more
than Forty Million pesos in cases of a large
industry; Provided, that such capitaliza-
tion shall be based on the total project
cost of such expansion/diversification as
stated in the approved project study sub-
mitted to and approved by the Board.

(e) That the expansion/diversification shall pro-
vide out of the labor force an employment of
no less than ten (10) persons in case of a
small-scale enterprise; at least twenty (20)
persons in case of a medium-scale enterprise;
and at least one hundred (100) persons in
case of a large industry, who are bona fide
residents of Davao City.

SECTION 13. - Application Requirements. - Applications shall
be filed with the Board, recorded in a registration book and the
date appearing therein and stamped on the application shall be
considered the date of official receipt thereof.
A non-refundable filing fee of One Thousand Pesos ($1,000.00)
shall be paid together with the following documents for registration:
(a) 3 copies of completed application form to be
provided for by the Board in accordance with
the provisions of this Code;
(b) A copy of the complete project study of the
proposed investment showing that the project
is economically, technically, and financially
feasible and viable;
(c) A copy of its Articles of Incorporation and
By-laws as approved by the Securities and
Exchange Commission, the Board of Invest-
ments, as the case may be;
(d) A certified true copy of its certificate of
registration with the Securities and Exchange
Commission, the Board of Investments,
Department of Trade and Industry, as
the case may be;
(e) Resolution of the President's Board of
Directors, in case of a corporation, authori-
zing the filing of application.

--- [Page 10] ---
Page 13

Resolution No. 5652
Ordinance No. 2017
Series of 1994
Continued

SECTION 14. - Approval and Registration Procedures. - The Board is authorized to adopt rules and regulations to facilitate action on applications filed with it; prescribe criteria for the evaluation of several applications filed in one preferred area; devise standard forms for use of applicants.

SECTION 15. - Certificate of Registration. - A registered enterprise under this Code shall be issued a certificate of registration with the signature of its Chairman and/or such other officer of the Board as it may empower and designate for the purpose. The certificate of registration shall be in such form and style as the Board may determine.

CHAPTER VI. - Rights and Privileges. - Section 16. - Rights and Privileges Guaranteed by the City Government. - All investors and registered enterprises are entitled to the rights and guarantees provided by law and the Constitution. In addition to such rights and guarantees, and to enhance investor confidence in the incentives program, the City Government, thru the Davao City Investment Incentive Board, shall:

(a) Provide a concise and comprehensive information to prospective investors on the economic priorities of the City Government, including the areas and the general conditions applicable to incoming direct private investments;

(b) Communicate investment evaluation criteria and procedures to enhance transparency in the process of granting government incentives;

(c) Take the fullest possible account of the need of the investors for stability, growth, and development in the formulation or modification of policies and ordinances that affect investments;

(d) Not interfere or notify arrangements with the investor after the details of the implementation of an investment project has been communicated to the investor if the ownership and management structure of the enterprise has

--- [Page 11] ---
Page 11

Resolution No. 5552
Ordinance No. 2017
Series of 1994
Continued

been established unless the law provides otherwise;

(a) Avoid undue distortion of competition between or among enterprises operating within its territorial jurisdiction, whether domestic or foreign, when granting any special concessions or incentives aimed at encouraging investments in the identified target areas;

(f) In accordance with law, and where no local personnel or worker is capable and available, allow the employment of qualified foreign workers when necessary for the efficient operation of the enterprise or for technology transfer;

(g) Resolve all doubts concerning the benefits and incentives granted under the ordinances enacted for the purpose of encouraging investment, in favor of the investor.

CHAPTER VII. INCENTIVES TO REGISTERED ENTERPRISES

SECTION 17. - Tax Incentives to Registered Enterprises.

In addition to the incentives provided by law and by the Local Government Code of 1991, a registered enterprise qualified under this Code shall enjoy the following tax incentives:

(a) Within three (3) years from the start of commercial operation, a registered enterprise, except from the Mayors' Permit Fees, building permit fees, business sales taxes and other fees and charges imposed under existing city ordinances;

(b) Exemption from the basic, real property tax imposed under the Tax Code of Davao City for a period of two (2) years from the date of approval of registration by the Board.

CHAPTER VIII. APPROPRIATIONS

SECTION 18. - Appropriation. - An initial funding to defray the expenses necessary for or incidental to the implementation of the provisions of this Code and of the Davao City Investment Incentive Board shall be sourced from the Davao City government fund contained, and hereby adapted, in the Memorandum of Agreement between the Davao City Government and the Philippine Exporters

--- [Page 12] ---
Page -12-
Resolution No. 6652
Ordinance No. 2017
Series of 1994
Continued
Confederation under its "Invest in Davao" Project for the period ending February 1996. Thereafter, the City Government shall approve annually, based on a budget presented by the Board, the necessary funding requirements which is deemed necessary for the continued implementation of the provisions of this Code, subject to the usual government accounting and auditing rules and regulations.
CHAPTER IX. FINAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 19. - Penal Clause. - Any violation of the provisions of this Code, existing laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, shall be a ground for the cancellation or revocation of the registration of the business and the withdrawal of all the incentives granted under this Code.
SECTION 20. - Separability Clause. - The provisions of this Code are hereby declared to be separable, and in the event that one or more of the other provisions are held illegal or unconstitutional, the validity of the other provisions shall not be affected.
SECTION 21. - Repealing Clause. - All ordinances, executive orders and rules and regulations inconsistent or in conflict with the provisions of this Code are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.
SECTION 22. - Effectivity. - This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon its approval.
INACED: May 13, 1994.
A vote of unanimity has been entered into the records.
Continued on Page -12-

--- [Page 13] ---
Page -13-
Resolution No. 6652
Ordinance No. 2017
Series of 1994
Continued:
APPROVED:
C. SANGUYAN
Vice-Mayor
Residing Officer
ATTESTED:
RICHARD A. DAVILA
Secretary
Sangguniang Panlungsod
aba/aad
APPROVED:
1994
RICHARD DUVERTS
City Mayor II
City of Davao
ATTESTED:
BENJAMIN L. LAGUZMAN
City Administrator
