=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance no. 02-99 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
Page 1 of 7

Republika ng Pilipinas
SANGUNIANG PANLUNGSOOD
Lungsod ng Davao
Twelfth City Council
5th Regular Session
ORDINANCE NO. 002
Series of 1999
AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 006, SERIES OF
1998, PARTICULARLY SECTION 3 THEREOF, AND
FOR OTHER PURPOSES

Be it Ordained by the Sanggunian: Panlungsod,
City of Davao that:

Section 1. Title. - This Ordinance shall be
known and cited as "THE DAVAO CITY DRUG TEST
ORDINANCE OF 1998".

Section 2. Declaration of Policy. - Drug
dependence or drug abuse has long been a social and
psychological menace, leading to drug-related cases
or crimes. Hence, it is the policy of the City
Government to reduce if not to eradicate this problem
for the general welfare of the citizenry. Safeguards
such as the right of the individual to be free from
compulsory drug testing to those who may want to avoid
but most especially to the personnel of the city
government, for the purpose of treatment and
rehabilitation shall also be undertaken by the City
Government to further curb the increase of
social menace thereby, and to ultimately make
Davao City a drug safe place to live in.

CHAPTER I
DEFINITION OF TERMS

Section 3. Definitions - As used in this
Ordinance, the following terms are defined as
follows:

(a) "Drug dependence" - as defined by R.A. No. 6425,
as amended, Section 2; "state of psychic or
physical dependence on habit or dangerous drug,
arising in connection with habitual addiction or use
of that drug on a periodic or continuous basis."

(b) "Marijuana" - as defined by the R.A. No. 6425,
as amended, Section 2; "Indian Hemp," otherwise known
as "marijuana," embraces every kind, class, genus or

--- [Page 2] ---
Page 2 of 7

specie of the plant cannabis sativa L., including cannabis american, hashish, bhang, guzsa, churros and generically all other kind, class and character thereof, whether dried or un-dried, flowers, fruiting tops or any part or portions of the plant, seeds, that is, all its geographic varieties, whether as a reefer, resin, extract, tincture or in any form whatsoever.

(c) "Shabu" - also known with the generic name of methamphetamine hydrochloride", is one of the major drugs dealt by drug dealers. This means that the shabu stimulates the activity of the central nervous system and produce psychological and physical dependence.

(d) "Regular employees" - those government employees whose appointments are for permanent and regular positions.

(e) "Contractual employees" - those employees that are covered by contractual appointments considered government employees, and whose terms of service are counted for purposes of retirement.

(f) "Persons under contracts of services" - those persons that are covered by contracts of services and are not considered government employees, hence their terms of service are not counted for purposes of retirement.

CHAPTER II

VOLUNTARY AND COMPULSORY DRUG TESTING

Section 4. Voluntary Drug Testing.
- Voluntary drug testing shall be undertaken by incumbent, former, and regular employees, and persons already hired and not yet under term of service. Such drug testing shall be taken at the full expense of the City Government as a way of assuring that those who are physically and mentally fit, and safe from any drug dependence. PROHIBIT, however, that their refusal to submit to a drug test shall not be grounds for dismissal or termination. The funding source shall be provided by the City Executive Department upon the discretion of the City Mayor.

Section 5. Mandatory Drug Testing - Pursuant to Memorandum Circular No. 34, Series of 1997 of the Civil Service Commission, in accordance to CSC Resolution No. 17-462, it states that "the Civil Service Commission promulgates and adopts a policy on

--- [Page 3] ---
Page 3 of 7

pre-employment mental, physical-medical examinations to ensure the highest degree of productivity of its employees. All officials and employees entering the government's service shall be required to undergo the following tests:

1. Blood Test;
2. Urinalysis;
3. Chest X-ray;
4. Drug Test;
5. Neuro-psychiatric Exam (if necessary)

All heads of departments/agencies are enjoined to appropriate funds for the above-mentioned examination as part of the government Physical and Mental Fitness Program.

In addition, hereof, mandatory drug testing shall also be administered for those renewing renewal for which will be provided by the City Executive Department included in the annual budget for the City Health Office.

Section 6. Types of Drug Tests to be Undertaken and the Administering Agencies: Voluntary and mandatory drug testing as stated in this Ordinance shall include the use of marijuana and shabu. Drug testing for substances other than those mentioned here shall be taken at the expense of the employee or applicant, and/or upon the request of the employing agency/department. It is understood that the employing agency/department has reasonable grounds for requesting drug tests other than those for marijuana and shabu.

The drug test that shall be administered is the screening test, usually given by Dangerous Drugs Board (DDB) accredited government agencies and Class I laboratories. Class II laboratories are those that are capable of performing, with competence, preliminary examinations concerning, of dangerous drugs in the body fluids, such as urine.

If and when the subject tested positive in the screening test, a confirmatory test shall be recommended to determine whether validity. Confirmatory testing shall be referred to Class A or Class B laboratories duly accredited by the Dangerous Drugs Board.

Section 7. Confidentiality of Drug Testing:
All subjects' confidants' test results are strictly confidential. It is further stated that these tests not be revealed to any person other than the parents/guardians of the subject of the test or the subject himself. An additional copy shall be given by the testing center/laboratory to the Human Resource Management Office (HRMO) or its equivalent.

--- [Page 4] ---
Page 4 of 7

Section 8. Treatment and Rehabilitation of Drug Dependent.
If in the course of the drug testing of an applicant for a position under contract of service is proven positive through a contravitory test and a drug dependent, the said subject shall hereby be recommended for proper treatment and rehabilitation, shall be subjected to the provisions stated in Section 30 of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics otherwise known as "The Dangerous Drugs Act of 1972."

CHAPTER III

PROCEDURES IN DRUG TESTING

Section 9. The Role of Human Resource Management Office (HRMO).
The Human Resource Management Office (HRMO) or its equivalent from the employing agency/department of the city government, shall be the responsible body for the overall procedural flow in taking voluntary or mandatory drug testing. Its head shall oversee the proper implementation of the drug testing procedures.

Section 10. Procedures in Voluntary Drug Testing.
The following procedures shall be undertaken by those who want to avail of voluntary drug testing:

a. The interested employee or person under contract of service shall approach the Head of the Human Resource Management Office or its equivalent from the employing agency/department for a request for voluntary drug testing. He/she shall fill out a form with the latter for the appropriate date, time, and venue of the drug testing. A request form shall be duly acknowledged by the requesting employee or person under contract of service for purposes thereof.

b. On the designated date, time, and venue, the interested employee or person under contract of service shall give the request form to the assigned center/laboratory of the Center/Laboratory Accredited by the Dangerous Drugs Board (DDB). The subject shall then be administered the screening test using urine as a sample;

c. The testing center/laboratory through the assigned personnel shall provide the subject with his/her screening results. An advisory note stating only if the subject is either positive or negative.

--- [Page 5] ---
Page 3 of 7

negative shall be submitted by the testing center/laboratory to the Head of the HRM or the head of its equivalent office from the employing agency/department;

d. If tested positive, the subject is advised to take a confirmatory test. If willing to undergo the said test, the subject shall confer with the Head of the Human Resource Management Office (HRM) or the head of its equivalent from the employing agency/department; if his/her designated officer for the appropriate data, the subject shall again be given an advisory note for the confirmatory testing. An advisory note shall again be provided and properly advised on the result of his/her confirmatory test.

Section 11. Procedures in Mandatory Drug Testing:

The following procedures shall be undertaken by those who administer mandatory drug testing as a pre-employment requirement:

a. Prior to the first day of official hiring, all newly accepted persons under contracts of services shall be given respective notices by the Head of the Human Resource Management Office (HRM) or the head of its equivalent from the employing agency/department, or his/her designated officer requiring mandatory drug testing. They shall be informed to report to the Head of the Human Resource Management Office (HRM) or the head of its equivalent from the employing agency/department, to get their respective request forms stating the scheduled date, time and venue of the drug testing.

b. On the designated date, time and venue, the subject shall give the required form to the assigned personnel of the testing center/laboratory accredited by the Dangerous Drugs Board (DDB). The subject shall then be administered the screening test using urine as a sample.

c. The testing center/laboratory through the assigned personnel shall provide the subject with his/her screening test results. An advisory note addressed to the subject will be made available from the employing agency/department shall be given to the subject with an instruction to submit it to the said office. Full compliance of the pre-employment requirement;

d. If tested positive, the subject is advised to take a confirmatory test. If willing to undergo the said test, the subject shall confer with the Head of the Human Resource Management Office (HRM) or the head of its equivalent from the employing agency/department;

--- [Page 6] ---
Page 6 of 7

the appropriate date, time and venue for confirmatory test. An advisory note shall again be addressed to the HRD/ODS within 10 days from the employing agency/ department, and be given the subject with an instruction to submit it to the said office. The subject shall be provided and properly advised on the result of his/her confirmatory test.

CHAPTER III

PENAL PROVISIONS

Section 12. Violation of Confidential Nature of Drug Test Results. In case the drug test results are revealed other than those provided in Section 7 of the Ordinance and those stated in Sections 30, 31 and 32 of this Ordinance, as amended, otherwise known as "The Dangerous Drug Act of 1972", the finder shall be penalized with a fine not exceeding five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or an imprisonment for a period not exceeding one (1) year or both at the discretion of the court.

Section 13. Failure or Refusal to Submit to Drug Testing and the Drug Test Results; Its Effect: The employer shall be fined $500.00 for duly-accepted personnel, newly accepted persons under contract of services, and those seeking renewal of their contracts, benefits or contracts of services to submit the results of their drug tests, and 14 days from the date of the latest drug test, or their final appointment bodies for drug testing as a pre-employment requirement shall be disqualified ground for the disapproval of their final appointments or contracts of services.

CHAPTER IV

FINAL PROVISIONS

Section 14. Separability Clause. Any court declaring any provision of this Ordinance unlawful or unconstitutional shall not affect all other provisions hereinafter affected, which shall continue to be in full force and effect.

Section 15. Repealing Clause. Any provision inconsistent therewith, are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

Section 16. Effectivity. This Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon its approval.

--- [Page 7] ---
Page 7 of 7

ENACTED, February 2, 1999, by unanimous vote
of all the members of the Sanggunian present.

APPROVED:

JUANITA M. RIA, JR.
City Councilor
Acting Presiding Officer

ATTESTED:

LOLITA D. GARCIA
Acting Secretary
Sanggunian Panlungsod

APPROVED: 1999

BENJAMIN C. DE GUZMAN
City Mayor II

ATTESTED:

NECTOR M. LUNETA
City Administrator
Pmtc
