=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 005003-97_12875-5003-97 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
11th City Council
35th Regular Session
Series of 1997

Republika ng Pilipinas
LUNGSOD NG DABAW
Tanggapan ng Sanogunlang Panlungsod

EXCERPT FROM THE MINUTES OF THE REGULAR SESSION OF THE SANOGUNLIANG PANLUNGSOOD, CITY OF DAVAO, HELD ON PHIDAY, SEPTEMBER 12, 1997.

PRESENT:
Councilor Tomas J. Monteverde, IV, Acting Presiding Officer
Councilor Pilar C. Braga
Councilor Aristeo V. R. Albuy
Councilor Leonardo R. Ayila, III
Councilor Jose A. Balado
Councilor Antonio H. Vergara
Councilor Rene V. Galopin
Councilor Daniel C. Delgado
Councilor Danilo C. Degonghirang
Councilor Diosdado A. Bahipus
Councilor Pedro B. Saludner
Councilor Jose A. Balado
Councilor Cornelio C. Reta, III
Councilor Alfredo H. Vergara
Councilor Valentin M. Benzon
Councilor Jose A. Balado
Councilor Victorio S. Arriuncula
Councilor Myrna L'Dalco-Oritz
Councilor Jose A. Balado
Councilor Pas C. Mate
Councilor Isidro T. Engap
Councilor Reynaldo P. Reyes
Councilor Jose A. Balado
Councilor Maria Margarita B. Paloton
Councilor Dioscoro B. Sampaga, Jr.

ON OFFICIAL BUSINESS:

Vice Mayor Benjamin C. de Guzman

ON LEAVE:

Councilor Bonifacio E. Militar

RESOLUTION NO. 12875

The proposed (Nondisputing Code of Davao City) duly recommended by the Committee on Games and Amusements for approval, was presented for consideration and appropriate action of the Body by Councilor Alfredo H. Vergara, Chairman of the Committee on Games and Amuse-
ment.
Councilor Vergara read into the record the explanatory note of the said Code, as follows:

WHEREAS, Republic Act 7160 otherwise known as the Local Government Code of 1991 with specific reference to Section 17, Article 24 of the Rules and

--- [Page 2] ---
Page 2

Resolution No. 12975

Ordinance No. 5005

Series of 1997/cont'd:

Regulations Implementing the Local Government Code
mandates the transfer of functions and responsibilities
of the National Government Agencies (N.G.A.)
to the Local Government Units (L.G.U.s):

WHEREAS, in compliance with the above-mentioned
sections of the Code, Presidential Executive Order Nos.
503 and 507, both Series of 1992 and Memorandum
of Agreement executed in January, 1993 by and between
the Philippine Central Commission and the City
Government of Davao;

He further emphasized that the passage of this Code is long
overdue considering that the authority for licensing and permit to
hold cockfight under the Local Government Code has now been devolved
from the National Government to the Local Government pursuant to
the pertinent provisions of the Local Government Code. In order to
systematize and rationalize cockfighting in the City of Davao it is imperative that this proposed
Cockfighting Code of Davao shall now be approved and implemented.

Councillor Reynaldo P. Reyes proposed to amend Sec. 13 of
the proposed Code particularly specifying therein the persons to be
penalized for certain violations of the Cockfighting Rules and Regulations
such as: The Mayor, Vice-Mayor, the President and/or General
Manager in case of partnership, the Manager or General Partner in
case of partnership and the Proprietor or Owner in case of single
proprietorship. Councillor Alfredo R. Vergara accepted such amendment
so that Sec. 13 shall read as follows:

SEC. 13 - Penal Clause - The President or General
Manager of a corporation, the Manager or General Partner
of a partnership, or the Proprietor or Owner of a
Single Proprietorship is held liable for any violation
of the Cockfighting Rules and Regulations. Similarly,
any violation of this ordinance shall be penalized by
a fine not exceeding the amount of P2,000.00 or as
prorated thereof not more than one (1) year, or both in
the same proceeding, and all the animals, poultry, fowl,
eggs, and all bets involved in the unlawful activity
shall be confiscated in favor of the City Government,
turned over to the Agriculturist and shall be dis-
abled by the City Magistrate as the manner provided by
law, rules and regulations."

Councillor Arminius likewise amended a portion of the Cockfight
and Cockfighting Rules and Regulations, particularly sub-paragraph
nph thereof reserving the phrase "By the Mayor" which provision
shall now read as follows: Yinz:

"SEC. 3. - Decensing of Cockpits - Subject to the
provisions of Section II of Republic Act 7150, the Same
shall be licensed only after the applicant has submitted
the application form prescribed by the City Government
for the issuance of license to operate cockpits in the City
of Davao pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (v), sub-
section (5) Section (a), Article 99 of the Local Govern-
ment Code of 1991."

Considering that there are no other amendments introduced en
the floor, Councillor Alfredo R. Vergara proposed for the final

--- [Page 3] ---
Page 3

Resolution No. 12875,

Ordinance No. 5005,
Series of 1977, cont'd.

Passage and approval of the COCKFIGHTING CODE OF DAVAO CITY.

After careful deliberation, on motion of Councilor Alfredo H. Vergara, duly and jointly seconded by Councilors Pilar Braga, Rene Valiente, and Mayor Antonio H. Vergara, Francisco J. Salillas, Daniel M. Gutierrez, Pedro A. Villanueva, Jr., and as seconded by Councilors Reynaldo P. Reyes and Vetricio S. Adriaculo, it was

RESOLVED, AS IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED, To approve an Ordinance entitled:

ORDINANCE NO. 5005

AN ORDINANCE PROHIBITING THE RULES/REGULATIONS AND PROVIDING FOR THE TREATY IN THE IRRIGATING, CONSTRUCTION, INSTALLATION, OPERAION AND MAINTENANCE OF COCKPITS AND COCKFIGHTING IN THE CITY OF DAVAO AND PRESCRIBING THE PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATIONS.

Be it Ordered by the Sanggunang Panlungsod, City of Davao, that:

SEC. 1. Title of the Ordinance - "COCKFIGHTING CODE OF DAVAO CITY".

SEC. 2. Definition of Terms - As used in this Ordinance, the following terms shall be understood, construed and applied, as follows:

a) Cockfighting (Sabong) - Shall embrace and mean the commonly known game or term "Cockfighting derby", "pintakasi", "Tupada", or its equivalent terms in different Philippine localities.

b) Cockpit (Sabangan) - The properly enclosed or fenced premises or compound provided with one or more gates or door for definite points of entrance and exit and licensed in accordance herewith for the holding of cockfighting derby, pintakasi, tupada or its equivalent terms in different Philippine localities.

c) Cockfight (molitada) - The actual fight or physical combat of two (2) pitted or evenly matched gamecocks, where bets on either side are laid.

Continued on Page 4.

--- [Page 4] ---
Page 4

Resolution No. 1375,
Ordinance No. 900,
Series of 1997, cont'd.

d) International Derby - Means a cockfight promotion with participants from different nations.
e) National Derby - Means a cockfight promotion with nationwide participation.
f) Regional Derby - Means a cockfight promotion with participants from a particular region.
g) Regular Cockfights - Means a cockfight held on Sundays and/or Legal Holidays.
h) Special Cockfight - Means a cockfight held on days other than Sundays and Legal Holidays for special purposes.
i) Special Permit - Means a permit secured from the Saamnunang Panlunggog to hold cockfighting on days other than Sundays and Legal Holidays.
j) Cockpit Manager - A person who professionally, regularly and habitually manages a cockpit and cockfights therein. He may or may not be owner of the cockpit himself.
k) Referee (Sentenciador) - A person who watches and oversees the progress of the cockfight and decides its results by announcing the winner or declaring a draw or no contest game.
l) Bet Manager (Kasador) - A person who calls and takes care of bets from owners of both gamecocks and those of other bettors before he orders commencement of the cockfight and thereafter, distributes winning bets to the winners after deducting a certain commission.
m) Bet-Taker (Kristo) - A person who participates in cockfights and with the use of money or other things of value, bets with other bettors, or through other bet-takers and wins or loses his bets depending upon the result of the cockfight as announced by the referee or sentenciador.

--- [Page 5] ---
Page 1

Resolution No. 138/72,
Ordinance No. 900,
Series of 1977; cont'd:

n) Gaffer (Managers) - A person knowledgeable in the technique
of armig fighting cocks with gaff or gaffs on either or both legs.

o) Handler (Sedator) - A person who personally takes physical
custody and control, inside the area of a pitted gamecock
and who actually relieves the same for actual fight and
combat in a cockfight.

p) Promoter - A person licensed by the Sangunianz Fanlangwood
as such, who is engaged in the convening, meeting, holding
and celebration of specially programmed and arranged cock-
fighting like local and international derbies or competitions,
special mains or matches or encounter, pintakasi and ordinary
fights or backfights.

q) Gamecock - Refers to domesticated fowls, whether imported
or locally bred, as well as the native fighting cock indi-
genous to the country, especially bred, trained and condi-
tioned for actual cockfighting or for propagation and breed-
ing purposes for eventual use in cockfighting.

r) Breeder - A person engaged in gamefowl breeding propagation
for personal and/or commercial purposes for eventual use in
cockfighting.

s) Cockeer (Africanado) - A person who participates and bets
in cockfighting as a sports, amusement, recreation or
form of relaxation.

t) Zoning Law or Ordinance - Either or both national or local
City Legislation which logically arranges, prescribes,
defines and apportions a given political subdivision into
specific land uses at present and future projection, if
needs warrant in accordance with the Housing and Land
Use Regulatory Board.

--- [Page 6] ---
Page -6-
Resolution No. 12875,
Ordinance No. 5003,
Series of 1977-com'd.
SEC. 3.- Rules and Regulations of
the Philippine Gamefowl Commission, adopted on June 1, 1981, and the
provisions of P.D. 1802 and other amendments, affecting cockpit,
cockfighting, and Cockpit personnel and P.D. 449, (Cockfighting
Law of 1974) as amended, are hereby adopted by the City as part of
this Ordinance, as follows:
COCKPITS AND COCKFIGHTING RULES AND
REGULATIONS
a) Ownership, Operation and Management of Cockpits - Only
filipino citizens not otherwise inhibited by existing laws, shall
be allowed to own, manage and operate cockpits; provided that coop-
erative capitalization is encouraged.
b) Establishments of Cockpits - Only one (1) cockpit shall be
allowed in each of the eleven (11) political districts namely: Pob-
lacan, Talomo, Agimia, Hubangin, Bunavas, Paquihat, Toril, Tugbo,
Calinaz, Bagao and Atiag Districts and those that maybe hereafter
be created, except in political districts with a population of over
one hundred thousand (100,000), two (2) cockpits may be established,
maintained, and operated.
c) Cockpit Site and Construction - Cockpits shall be constructed
and operated within the appropriate areas as prescribed in the Zoning
Ordinance. In the absence of such ordinance, the Sangguniang Pan-
lungsod shall enact an ordinance that no cockpits be constructed
within or near existing residential or commercial areas, hospitals,
school buildings, churches or other public buildings. Approval or
issuance of building permits for the construction of cockpits shall
be made in accordance with the building code and the zoning ordinance
of the City.
d) Licensing of Cockpits - Subject to the provisions of Book
II of Republic Act No. 7160, the Sangguniang Panlungsod shall enact

--- [Page 7] ---
Page -7-
Resolution No. 12875,
Ordinance No. 9003,
Series of 1997/comm'd.
an ordinance authorizing the issuance of licenses to operate cockpits in the City of Davan pursuant to the provisions of paragraph (v) sub-section (3), Section (a). Article 99 of the Local Government Code of 1991.
e) Requirements for Licensing of Cockpits - The following requirements must be fully complied with before the issuance of licenses:
1. New License - Every application for new license to operate or maintain a cockpit shall be accompanied with the following:
a) The location and vicinity plan of the cockpit
b) The cockpit building plan/design as approved by City Engineer, and a Certification by him to the effect that the cockpit was constructed in accordance with such approved plan/design.
c) A certification by the Zoning Administrator to the effect that the cockpit building was constructed in the area allowed by the Zoning Ordinance, and that it is not within a radius of 200 linear meters from any existing residential or commercial area hospitals, school buildings, churches, or other public buildings.
d) Official Receipts showing payment of City taxes, fees, and other levies prescribed by Ordinance No. 220, S. 1991, as amended, and other ordinances that may hereafter be promulgated by the Sangamangal Panlunged.
e) Sanitary Permit/Clearance.
2. Annual Renewal - Every application for the annual renewal of a license to operate or manage a cockpit shall be submitted not later than the last working day of December of each year, and shall be accompanied with the following:

--- [Page 8] ---
Page -3-
Resolution No. 12875,
Ordinance No. 5003,
Series of 1997, cont'd.;
a) Official Receipts showing payment of City Taxes,
fees and other levies as prescribed in Ordinance
No. 250, may hereafter be promulgated by the
Sangguniang Panlungsod;
b) In case the cockpit was constructed more than ten
(10) years before the date of renewal applications,
a Certification from the City Engineer to the
effect that such cockpit is free from material,
structural or other physical hazards.
f) Registration of Cockpits. - All cockpits in Davao City shall
register with the Office of the City Mayor, through the Business
Bureau. No cockpit shall be allowed to operate without proper
registration certificate being secured not later than January 20
annually.
g) Registration Certificate - In order to secure a Registration
Certificate, the applicant shall submit the following documents:
1. An application stating therein the name of the cockpit
2. A copy of the location and vicinity plan of the cockpit
3. A copy of the cockpit building plan/design
4. A certified copy of the Mayor's Permit/License
5. A copy of the Sanitary Permit/Clearance
6. A xerox copy/copies of official receipts of payments
7. 2 perspective photographs of the cockpit, and
8. A list of all duly licensed personnel and copy of
their perspective licenses
h) Holding of Cockpits - Except as provided in this ordinance,
cockfighting shall be allowed only in licensed cockpits, during
Sundays and Legal Holidays, and during local fiestas, for not more
than three (3) days. It may also be held during City Agricultural
Commercial or Industrial Fairs, carnivals or expositions, for a similar
period of three (3) days upon resolution of the Sangguniang Panlungsod;

--- [Page 9] ---
Page -9-
Resolution No. 12875,
Ordinance No. 3005,
Series of 1997, cont'd.
Provided, That no cockfighting shall be held on December 30 (Rizal Day), June 12 (Philippine Independence Day), November 30 National Heroes Day), Holy Thursday, Good Friday, Election and Referendum Day and during Registration Days for such election or referendum.
i) Cockfighting for Entertainment of Tourists or for Charitable Purposes. Subject to the preceding subsection hereof, the City Mayor may also allow the holding of cockfighting for the entertainment of foreign dignitaries or for tourists, or for returning Filipinos, commonly known as "Bullhayan", or for the support of national or city fund-raising campaigns for charitable purposes, as may be authorized by the President or the Sangguniang Panlungsod, upon the latter's resolution, in licensed cockpits; Provided that this privilege shall be extended for only one (1) time, for a period not exceeding three (3) days, within a year in the City or in each of the political districts.
j) Other Games During Prescribed Cockfights. No gambling of any kind shall be permitted on the premises of the cockpit or place of cockfighting during, cockfights. The owner, manager or lessees of such cockpit and the violators of this injunction shall be criminally liable under Section 12 hereof.
k) Special Permits:
1. Special permits can be issued only under the circumstances enumerated in sub-paragraphs (b) and (c) above. Provided, that derbies and cockfighting covered by these permits shall be held only on days other than Sundays and Legal Holidays.
2. No special cockfights shall be allowed unless authorized by the Sangguniang Panlungsod through an approved resolution at least 30 days before the event.

--- [Page 10] ---
Page -10-
Resolution No. 12875,
Ordinance No. 3003,
Series of 1977; code 4;
3. Every application shall be signed by the owner/operator
of licensee of the cockpit where such special cockfight
are to be held, and countersigned by the promoter or a
representative of the beneficiary, to be supported with
the necessary documents, as follows:
a) A copy of Presidential or Mayor's Proclamation
authorizing the fund raising campaign;
b) Letter request of the beneficiary to the cockpit
owner, operator or licensee to stage special cock-
fights in a particular cockpit;
c) Resolution of the Sangguianan Panlungsod during
official town fiestas and agricultural, industrial
or commercial fairs, carnivals or expositions;
d) Resolution of the Sangguianan Panlungsod for the
support of national fund raising campaigns for
charitable or other purposes as may be authorized
by the Office of the President of the City Mayor.
4. No international cockfight derby may be held without an
approved resolution by the Sangguianan Panlungsod author-
izing the same for the promotion of not more than eight
(8) international cockfight derbies every year in Davao
City, for the support of national fund-raising campaigns
as may be authorized by the Office of the President, upon
application of duly qualified promoters and countersigned
by the owner/operator or licensee of the cockpit. Such
application shall be filed at least sixty (60) days before
the scheduled international cockfight derby. In all these
cases, the above requirements are necessary.
5. Every application for an international cockfight derby
Continued on Page -11-

--- [Page 11] ---
Page -11-
Resolution No. 12875,
Ordinance No. 5005,
Series of 1997 cont'd.
shall be supported with the following documents:
a) A copy of Proclamation authorizing the fund-
raising campaign;
b) Letter request from the beneficiary for the holding
of an international derby in a particular cockpit;
and
c) A list of expected foreign and local participants.
I. Prohibition Against Persons - No person less than fifteen
(15) years of age shall be allowed inside the premises of the cockpit
during cockpit. The Operator, manager or licensees shall be re-
sponsible for the strict compliance of this rule.
SEC. 4.- Registration of Breeders. - All breeders of gamefowl
are required to register with the City Agriculturist. The City
Agriculturist shall furnish the office of the City Mayor, copy
furnished the Sangguniang Panlungsod, with a complete record of
duly registered breeders.
SEC. 5.- License Fees for Cockpits - For this purpose, the annual
taxes shall be collected by the City Treasurer, as follows:
a) In the poblacion Talomo, Agdao and
Buhangin - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

--- [Page 12] ---
Page -12-
Resolution No. 138/75,
Ordinance No. 300,
Series of 1977/78.
b) Exemption - The tax herein imposed do not apply in the following cases, provided that exemption should first be obtained for this purpose through an approved resolution of the Sangguniang Panlungsod, upon recommendation of the City Treasurer:
1. Where the admission fees are collected for in behalf of charitable, educational or religious institutions or associations who are declared by law or presidential proclamation as exempted from the payment of assessment tax, provided, further, that such exhibitions, show, performance and the like shall be limited to only three (3) days in a calendar year.
2. Provided, Further, that said exemptions shall be applicable only to the share of the sponsoring exempt institutions or organizations as aforementioned. However, the remaining proceeds, including those accruing to the promoter, shall be subject to the payment of assessment tax in accordance with the above rates. The City Treasurer shall promulgate rules and regulations necessary for the effective implementation of the provision of paragraph (b) of this section, subject to the approval by the City Mayor.
c) Time of Payment - The taxes herein imposed shall be collected as part and not in addition to the price of admission tickets at the time patrons or customers are admitted to the amusement places or establishments. The taxes herein above imposed shall be and payable within first five (5) days of the month next following that for which they are due, by the proprietor, lessee, operator and promoter, and such taxes to be determined on the basis Continued on Page -15-

--- [Page 13] ---
Page 13

Resolution No. 12875,

Ordinance No. 5094,
Series of 1997, cont'd:

of a true and complete return of the amount of
gross receipts derived during the preceding month.
If the tax is not paid within the time fixed above, the
taxpayer shall be subject to such surcharges, interest
and penalties prescribed by this ordinance.

d) Administrative Provisions.
1. Remittance of Tax Surcharge for late remittance. -
The proprietor, lessee, operator, or promoter of
cockpits shall withhold the assessments tax on ad-
mission.

The assessment tax withheld shall be remitted to the City
Treasurer within the first five (5) days of the month, fol-
lowing each month. The proprietor, lessee, operator, or
promoter concerned shall make a complete return of the gross
receipts derived during the preceding month which shall be
the basis for determining the tax due.

Failure to pay the tax within the time fixed herein-
above shall render those concerned liable to a surcharge
of twenty-five percent (2%) of the original amount plus
an interest at the rate of fourteen percent (14%) per annum
on the amount due until the same is fully paid. In case of
willful neglect to file the return and pay the tax within
the time required, or fraudulent return or a false return
is willfully made, the taxpayer shall be subject to sur-
charge of fifty percent (50%) of the correct tax due plus
fourteen percent (14%) interest per annum from due date
until the same is fully paid.

2. Ticket used as basis in paying the tax - Tickets will
be used for collecting the assessment tax imposed in this
Section.

--- [Page 14] ---
Page -1- Resolution No. 12875 Ordinance No. 5003 Series of 1997 cont'd: Operators of cockpit shall keep a notice in big legible letters or numbers placed in a conspicuous place in front of the ticket booths showing the total admission price, which will include as part thereof the city amusement taxes corresponding to each kind of ticket. 3. Form of tickets, their registration: Every proprietor, lessee operator or promoter of cockpit shall provide tickets which shall be serially numbered, indicating therein the name of the amusement place and the fee subject for admission. All tickets to be used whether regular, special or complimentary or employee's pass shall be presented to the Office of the City Treasurer for registration. Whenever there is change in the admission fee after registration, a notice to that effect shall be registered with the City Treasurer and be conspicuously posted in a place of business for the information of the public. Tickets presented at the gate or entrance shall be cut into three parts; the 1st part shall be returned to the customer, the 2nd part to be retained by the management, and the 3rd part shall be dropped in the CTO drop box supplied by the City Treasurer. The three (3) parts of a ticket shall bear the same number/ Sub-numbering of such tickets are strictly and the use of alloys and other substitutes for the admission tickets are strictly prohibited. 4. Verification and Inspection of Cockpits: The City Treasurer shall post an employee at the gate of cockpits for the purpose of verifying all tickets being sold thereat. (e) Applicability Clause: All other matters relating to the operation of amusement places or establishments shall be governed by pertinent laws, rules and regulations. Continued on Page -1-

--- [Page 15] ---
**Resolution No. 12875, Ordinance No. 9005, Series of 1997, cont'd:**

SEC. 7. - Cockfighting Officials - The following cockfighting officials are required to register with the Business Bureau, City Mayor's Office.

1. Promoters
2. Cockpit Managers
3. Referees (Sentenciadores)
4. Bet-Takers (Fristos)
5. Bet-Manager (Kazadoro)
6. Gaffers (Mananarís)

SEC. 8. Licensing of Cockfighting Officials - Promoter, cockpit managers, referees, bet-takers, bet-manager, or gaffers shall not act as such in any authorized cockfighting without first securing a license renewable every year on their birthdays from the City Mayor and the corresponding taxes, fees, and charges paid to the City Treasurer, in accordance with this ordinance. Only licensed cockfighting officials shall officiate in all kinds of cockfighting authorized in this ordinance.

SEC. 9. Fees - In addition to the taxes, fees, and other levies imposed by the City, under Section 5 and 6 hereof, the following fees shall be paid to the City Treasurer, pursuant to the provisions of the Local Government Code (R.A. 71600) before any operation or activity can be conducted.

COCKFIGHT AND COCKFIGHTING FEES AND CHARGES

1. Application filing fee
- P 20.00

2. For cockpit registration (annually):
a) Cockpit located:
(1) In the Publicacion (Dist. 1)
- P 750.00
(2) Other places
- P 500.00
b) Ocular Inspection fee
- P 300.00

Continued on Page -16-

--- [Page 16] ---
Page -16-
Resolution No. 12075,
Ordinance No. 3009,
Series of 1997/amount:
3. For registration of cockpit personnel (Annually):
a) Operator, general manager, promoter, host,
or such other terms applied to persons
promoting or hosting a cockfight
- P200.00
b) Cockpit Manager
- 100.00
c) Referee (Sastenciador)
- 100.00
d) Cashier
- 100.00
e) Bet-Manager (Macicador/Kasador)
- 100.00
f) Derby Matchmaker
- 100.00
g) Bet-Taker (Kristo)
- 50.00
h) Caffor (Mananari)
- 50.00
i) Special Permit Fees:
a) International Derby
- P2,000.00
b) Special Cockfights (Pintakasi)
- 1,000.00
5. Fee for Promoter of each Derby:
a) 2-cash derby
- P2 250.00
b) 3-cash derby
- 500.00
c) 4-cash derby
- 750.00
d) 5-cash derby
- 1,000.00
6. For Special Derby Assessment :
a) for every winning cock
- 50.00
7. Filing fee for all complaints, petitions
and/or applications for proper equitable
reliefs provided for in this Code
- 500.00
SEC. 10.- Anti-Fraud Measures - All persons involved in cock-
fightings and in the operation of cockpit, including, among others,
the owner or operator of cockpit, the cockpit officials, the cockers
(facilinadores) and government officers involved in the issuance of permits
or licenses and the inspection of cockpit, must observe utmost honesty,
fair play, good faith, and peace and order.
Continued on Page -18-

--- [Page 17] ---
Page -17-
Resolution No. 12875,
Ordinance No. 9065,
Series of 1997; g.a.r.d.;
SEC. 11.- Complaints and Protest - The Legal Officer shall take cognizance of complaints and protests relative to the operation and management of cockpits or the conduct of cockfights, and violations of this Ordinance, which complaints and protests must be in writing and under oath. The City Legal Office shall prescribe the rules and procedures governing such cases, subject to the approval of the City Mayor.
SEC. 12.- Supplementary Rules - In all cases not covered herein, the Rules and Regulations of the Philippine Gamefowl Commission, adopted on June 1, 1981, the provisions of P.D. 1802 and other amendment affecting cockpits, cockfighting, and cockpits personnel, and P.D. 449 (Cockfighting Law of 1974) as amended, shall govern.
SEC. 13.- Penalty Clause - Any violation of this ordinance shall be penalized by a fine not exceeding the amount of P2,000.00 or an imprisonment of not more than one (1) year or both in the discretion of the Court, and the violator's cock, bets and eggs, and all bets involved in the unlawful activity shall be confiscated in favor of the City Government, turned over to the City Agriculturist and shall be disposed of by the City Mayor in the manner provided by law, rules and regulations.
SEC. 14.- Repealing Clause - Sub-Paragraph 21 (a to c) paragraph H, Article 6, chapter IV or Ordinance No. 230, S. 1991, as amended, and all ordinances, rules and regulations which are inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.
SEC. 15.- Separation Clause - A judicial declaration that a part of this Ordinance is unlawful shall not affect the others.
SEC. 16.- Effectivity - This Ordinance shall commence to take effect upon approval and after the required publications in a news-paper of general circulation.

--- [Page 18] ---
Page -15- Resolution No.: 2875; Ordinance No.: XXXII; Series of App/Cont'as: ENACTED: September 12, 1997. A vote of unanimity has been entered into the records. APPROVED: SUMAS J. MENDOZA, IV City Counsel Acting Presiding Officer ATTESIED: GUILHERME Q. SALDANA Secretary Sanggunan ng Davao aba/essa APPROVED: 1997 RODRIGO DUTERTE City Mayor II City of Davao ATTESIED: ANTONIO LIMAS City Administrator
