=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 000655-92_3094-655-92 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
10th City Council
18th Regular Session
Series of 1992

Republica ng Pilipinas
LUNGSOD NG DABAW
Tanggapan ng Sangguniang Panlungsod

EXCERPT FROM THE MINUTES OF THE REGULAR SESSION OF THE SANGUNIANG PANLUNSGOD, CITY OF DAVAO, HELD ON MONDAY, NOVEMBER 9, 1992.

PRESENT:
Vice Mayor Luis C. Bongoyan, Presiding Officer
Councilor Leonardo N. Avila, III
Councilor Nilo G. Abelsera
Councilor Antonio M. Vergara
Councilor Manuel Militar
Councilor Rene V. Galopao
Councilor Pilar C. Braga
Councilor Jose A. Monchishirang
Councilor Tomas Monterverde, Jr.
Councilor Antonia S. Castillo
Councilor Genalicio R. Retta, III
Councilor Dionisio A. Del Rosario
Councilor Jaime Q. Rodriguez
Councilor Renita H. Circulo
Councilor Jose A. Madrigal
Councilor Romano E. Pilay
Councilor Agosto P. Fuentes
Councilor Leoncio A. Cano
Councilor Leonora D. Cascabel
Councilor Shane L. Dolor
Councilor Paz C. Mata
Councilor Antonio H. Venus
Councilor Nazario N. Navarro, Sr.

ON OFFICIAL BUSINESS:
Councilor Aristeo V. R. Alsey - U.S.A.
Councilor Frances A. Robillol - Manila

RESOLUTION No. 3994

The 5th Indorsement, dated October 19, 1992, of the Committees on Rules and Privileges inquiring to the City the proposed Ordinance CREATING AND ESTABLISHING THE MANAGEMENT BOARD OF TOMAS MONTERVERDE, SR., SPORTS COMPLEX OF DAVAO CITY, recommending approval thereof, was presented for consideration and appropriate action of the City by Councilor Dionisio A. Mahupus, Chairman, Committee on Rules and Privileges.

Several amendments were introduced by Councilor Dionisio A. Mahupus for additional provisions of said proposed ordinance and insertions of some words and phrases in some parts thereof, for which the proponent offered no objections.

After careful deliberation, on motion of Councilor Bonifacio E. Militar, Jr., and on recommendation of Councilors Abiesa, Lolo, Dolor, Leonardo N. Avila, Tomas Monterverde, Jr., Fajal, Q. Rodriguez and Pilar C. Braga, as amended by Councilor Dionisio A. Mahupus, it was Continued on Page 2-

--- [Page 2] ---
Page 2

Resolution No. 90th Ordinance
No. 659, series of 1992, cont'd:

RESOLVED, AS IT IS HEREBY RESOLVED, To approve as amended the creation of the Management Board of Tomas Monteverde, Sr. Sports Complex in Davao City;

RESOLVED, FURTHER, To approve an Ordinance entitled:

ORDINANCE NO. 659

AN ORDINANCE CREATING AND REABRILISHING THE MANAGEMENT BOARD OF TOMAS MONTEVERDE, SR SPORTS COMPLEX OF DAVAO CITY DEFINING ITS FUNCTIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.

Be it Ordained by the Sangguniang Panlungsod, City of Davao, that:

SEC. 1. Title of the Board - This Board shall be known as the "TOMAS MONTEVERDE, SR. SPORTS COMPLEX MANAGEMENT BOARD."

SEC. 2. Declaration of Policy - It is the policy of the Management Board to promote physical education, encourage and sustain the development of the sports in the City; to foster physical fitness, self-discipline, teamwork and excellence for the development of a healthy and alert citizenry through the management, development and proper maintenance of the Tomas Monteverde, Sr. Sports Complex.

SEC. 3. Creation of the Management Board - To carry out the above policy, a body known as the Tomas Monteverde, Sr. Sports Complex Management Board hereinafter referred to as the Board, is hereby created and established.

SEC. 4. Status of the Board - The Board shall have the status as that of the City Government regulatory and Management board. The Chairman thereof being the City Mayor of Davao with the composition of twelve (12) members.

SEC. 5. Nature of the Board - The Board shall exercise its corporate powers. It shall have a seat, may sue and be sued and shall be the policy-making and coordinating body of all sports development programs and institutions within the Complex.

SEC. 6. Principles of the Board - The principles of the Board are:

--- [Page 3] ---
Page 4

Resolution No. 399/4, Ordinance No. 505, Series of 1982, cont'd:

and other persons or entities involved in and supporting sports development as may be permissible under the rules on sports;
h) Conduct basic and applied research on sports development;
i) Conduct promotion and fund-raising campaigns in accordance with existing laws to achieve the purposes of this Board;
j) Exercise such other acts as are incident to or appropriate and necessary in connection for which the Board was created;
k) To recommend fees and other charges for the use and enjoyment of the facilities of the Complex, which fees and other charges are subject to the approval of the Sangguniang Panlungsod.

SEC. 3. Composition of the Board - The Board shall be composed of the City Mayor as Chairman and twelve (12) Members as follows:
Three (3) from the Office of the City Mayor:
- City Engineer
- Sports Coordinator
- City Planning Coordinator
Three (3) from the Office of the Sangguniang Panlungsod:
- Chairman, Committee on Sports, Games & Amusement
- Chairman, Committee on Education & Youth Affairs
- Chairman, Committee on Rules & Privileges
Two (2) from the DGS:
- City Superintendent and Regional Director
NCC's - One (1) RDC
- One (1) POC's Highest Representative
from Davao City:
- One (1) President, Association of Private Schools and Colleges, in Davao City
- One (1) from the Donor Family or Tomas A. Monteverde, Jr. or any of his successors

--- [Page 4] ---
Page 3

Resolution No. 3994, Ordinance
No. 529, series of 1992, cont'd.

a) To provide the leadership, formulate the policies
and set the priorities and direction of sports promotion and
development particularly giving emphasis on grass roots partici-
pations.
b) To encourage wide participation of all sectors, govern-
ment and private inports promotion and development; and,
c) To supplement government appropriation for sports pro-
motion and development.
SEC. 7. Functions of the Board - The Board shall have the
following functions:
a) Plan, implement and oversee and integrate sports pro-
motion and development program of the Complex;
b) Establish and maintain linkages with national sports
association, or organization of the country whose main objective
is sports;
c) Plan and oversee a program to enable the Complex to be
a venue for and to host local, regional, national and international
games;
d) Establish, develope and maintain fully-equipped sports
facilities within the Complex;
e) Plan and formulate programs and review or evaluate, from
time to time the organizational set-up projects and programs of
the Complex;
f) Develop and promulgate rules and regulations to implement
this program including the rules to delineate and define rights
and responsibilities of all sectors involved in sports promotion
and development, respecting the individual set-up, priorities,
structures and competence within the Complex;
g) Provide incentives and recognition and awards to deserving
associations, athletes, referees, game officials, coaches, trainers

--- [Page 5] ---
Page 5

Resolution No. 3094, Ordinance No. 552, series of 1992, cont'd:

SEC. 9. Honoriaurium of the Chairman and Members - The Chairman and the Members shall receive honoraria and shall be entitled to other benefits and privileges as may be provided by an Ordinance passed by the Sanggunian Parliment, the effectivity of which shall be fixed by the same Sanggunian.

SEC. 10. Powers of the Board - The Board Chairman with the approval of the Board has the power to do all acts and things necessary to be done for and in connection with the performance of its functions, including:

a) To appoint executive officers and other personnel of the Board and fix their compensation subject to existing laws, rules and regulations;

b) To delegate authority of the performance of any function to officials and employees under the direction of the Board;

c) To enter into contracts in connection with the management and regulations of the Complex. No contract shall be undertaken for the conveyance or encumbrance of said Complex;

d) To acquire, use and control building facilities, instruments, tools and rights required or otherwise necessary for the accomplishment of the purposes of the Board;

e) To acquire, own possess and dispose of personal properties of the Complex;

f) To regulate the acquisition, procurement, distribution and use of sports wear, equipment, instruments, tools and other sports facilities necessary and required for training of athletes;

g) To assist and support associations and institutions in the implementation of sports activities;

h) To confer, extend and grant awards, benefits and privileges to athletes, coaches and officials for outstanding performances and contributions in sports development in the City.

--- [Page 6] ---
Page 5

Resolution No. 3094, Ordinance No. 552, series of 1994, cont'd.:

regional, national and international levels of sports activities;
i) To confer, extend and grant support or assistance to
sports association and institutions which are in good standing
with the Complex;
j) To accept donations, gifts, bequests and grants for the
purpose of the Complex, to be done by the Chairman in behalf of
the City of Davao and in the name of the City of Davao;
SEC. 11.- Ownership - It is an admitted fact that the Board
will use and develop the whole area of 72,220 sq. m. which is co-
vered by Transfer Certificate of Title No. T-1851 (T-A0) which
is owned and possessed by the City Government of Davao, previously
municipal government of Davao which title was issued in the year 1949 and
that the said described parcel of land is located and situated at
Palma Gil and Camus Streets in the heart of the City of Davao, now
known as TOMAS NONENYERRE, SR. SPORTS COMPLEX OF DAVAO CITY.
SEC. 12.- Functions and Responsibilities - There shall be
an executive director who shall be appointed or designated as such
by the Chairman with the approval of the Board and shall serve for
a minimum term of one (1) year, subject to renewal for another
year, upon approval of the Board, unless sooner removed for a
valid and reasonable cause, who shall direct and supervise the day
to day operation of the Complex. The Executive Director shall have
supervision and control over the administrative staff and services
from whose conduct, he shall be directly and personally answerable
to the Board. In case of mismanagement or any violation of the pro-
visions of this ordinance, rules, regulations and laws by the Execu-
tive Director, the Board shall immediately take over its functions.
SEC. 13.- Qualification of Executive Director - No person
shall be appointed as Executive Director unless he or she is a

--- [Page 7] ---
Page 7

Resolution No. 3094, Ordinance
No. 655, series of 1992, cont'd:

citizen of the Republic of the Philippines and at least thirty (30) years of age, of good moral character, college graduate, and has at least five (5) years experience in sports administration.

SEC. 14. Functions and Responsibilities of Executive Officials and Staffs - The Executive Officers and Staff shall be primarily responsible for providing services related to management personnel, record, supplies and equipment and shall be primarily responsible for the execution, plans and programs formulated by the Board and other functions which may be assigned by the Board to them from time to time.

SEC. 15. Appointment of Staff and Employees of the Board - The Staff, officers and employees of the Board shall be appointed by the Chairman of the Board with the approval of the Board.

SEC. 16. Tax Exemptions of the Use of Sports Facilities - To encourage participation in sports, no local tax of any kind shall be levied on the use of sports facilities whether the tax be on the user, owner or operator of the sports facilities and in accordance with existing laws, such tax exemptions shall be limited to sports tournaments and exhibitions.

SEC. 17. Repealing Clause - All rules and regulations or parts thereof inconsistent with this Ordinance are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SEC. 18. Separable or Clause - If any provision of the Ordinance is declared unconstitutional, the same shall not affect the validity and effectivity of the other provisions thereof.

SEC. 19. Effectivity - This Ordinance shall take effect upon its approval.

INACTED: November 9, 1992.

Continued on Page 8

--- [Page 8] ---
Page 8-
Resolution No. 3094, Ordinance
No. 655, series of 1992, cont'd:
A vote of unanimity has been entered into the records.
APPROVED:
LUIS C. BCNGUYAN
Vice Mayor II
Presiding Officer
ATTENDED:
Nestor R. Duferte
Secretary
Sangguniang Panlungsod
aba/esa
APPROVED:
1992
RODRIGO R. DUFERTE
City Mayor II
City of Davao
ATTENDED:
Benjamin C. De Guzman
City Administrator
City Secretary - Designate
