=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 000697-21 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
Republic of the Philippines
City of Davao
Office of the Sangguniang Panlungsod

19th City Council
33rd Regular Session
Series of 2021

PRESENT:
Councillor Edgar P. Ibyuan Jr.
Councillor Ralph O. Abella
Councillor Nilo D. Abellera
Councillor Maria Belén S. Acosta
Councillor Bai Hundra Cassandra Dominique N. Advincula
Councillor Dante L. Apostol Sr.
Councillor Conrado B. Baluran
Councillor Jessica M. Bonguyan
Councillor Louie John J. Bonguyan
Councillor Pilar C. Braga
Councillor Augusto Javier G. Campos III
Councillor Dante C. Dayanghirang
Councillor Edgar R. Ibyuan
Councillor Pamela A. Librado-Morata
Councillor Diosdado Angelo Junior R. Mahipus
Councillor Jaffar U. Marohomsalic
Councillor Myrna G. L'dalido-Oritz
Councillor Antoinette G. Principe-Castrodes
Councillor Mecher n. Quitain Jr.
Councillor Almira A. Ungal
Councillor Mary Joselle D. Villafuerte
Councillor Jesus Joseph P. Zozobra III

ABSENT:
Vice Mayor Sebastian Z. Duterte
Councillor Richlyn N. Justol-Baguilod
Councillor Bonifacio E. Militar

ORDINANCE NO. 0697-21
Series of 2021

AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 92, SERIES OF 2000, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS "AN ORDINANCE REGULATING THE CONSTRUCTION, REPAIR, RENOVATION, ASSEMBLY, INSTALLATION, AND MAINTENANCE OF OUTDOOR ADVERTISING MATERIALS AND SIGNAGES AND FOR RELATED PURPOSES"

--- [Page 2] ---
Page 2 of 27
Ord. No. 0697-21

Be it ordained by the Honorable Sangguniang Panlungsod of Davao City, in session assembled, that:

SECTION 1. TITLE - This Ordinance shall be known as the "OUTDOOR ADVERTISING MATERIALS AND SIGNAGE ORDINANCE OF DAVAO CITY".

SECTION 2. STATEMENT OF POLICY - It is the policy of the City Government of Davao:

1. To safeguard its people's life and property by providing all signages and outdoor advertising materials prescribed standards and regulatory measures relative to their site, design, load and stresses, anchorage, quality of materials, construction and maintenance;

2. To keep outdoor signs and sign structures in private and public spaces within Davao City clean and orderly by imposing basic discipline and regulation;

3. To display or convey only messages or visuals that conform to public decency and good taste;

4. To encourage installation or replacement of signs that are compatible with the architectural style, scale, and physical characteristics of the building, and are appropriate to the zone, use, building, neighborhood or community/district theme where they are located;

5. To ensure and enable a fair and consistent application and enforcement of the regulation of this Ordinance;

6. To promote the aesthetic and environmental values of the community or district by providing professional, quality, well-designed, well-spaced, and well-balanced signage;

7. To preserve and enhance overall property values and the quality of the built environment in the City by reducing visual blight and by providing signs that do not interfere with the appeal of the City as a place to live, work, shop, visit, and enjoy;

8. To avoid traffic and/or safety hazards to motorists, bicyclists, and pedestrians caused by visual distractions and obstructions;

9. To safeguard and protect public health, safety, and general welfare by regulating the design, size, location, construction and maintenance of signs, and by promoting signs that are clear and legible;

10. To encourage creative, unique, and artistic signs that advance the City's image as a place of beauty, spaciousness, and high quality of life.

--- [Page 3] ---
**Page 3 of 27
Ord. No. 0697-21**

**CHAPTER 2
SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY**

SECTION 3. SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY
The provisions of this Ordinance shall apply to all advertising particularly on the design, location, site plan, construction, repair, removal, dismantling and maintenance of all signs and sign structures intended for advertisement and other related purposes.

SECTION 4. APPLICABILITY
The provisions of the Ordinance shall be applicable within the entire territory and jurisdiction of the City of Davao.

**CHAPTER 3
DEFINITION OF TERMS**

SECTION 5. DEFINITION
For purposes of this Ordinance, the following definitions shall apply:

a. ADVERTISING SIGN - A sign that directs attention to a business, profession, commodity, services or entertainment conducted, sold or offered for public/private consumption exposed in an outdoor presentation.

b. ARCADE AND ARCADED SIDEWALK - In areas determined as an arcaded zone/district as approved by the City Council through the Zoning Ordinance or through an approved subdivision plan, an arcade and an arcaled sidewalk is one where the floor of the building projects above the sidewalk serving as its cover or roof or simply a sidewalk with a roof above it.

c. BANNER OR STREAMER SIGN - A sign made of flexible, lightweight materials (such as cloth, canvas, plastic or cardboard) that is suspended along one edge or attached at the corners to a building, structure or object.

d. BILLBOARD - A panel for posting bills or posters which exceeds six (6) sq.m. in area.

e. BUSINESS SIGN - An identification on premises or accessory sign that directs attention to a profession, business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered in the same place where the business is located.

f. BUILDING LINE - A line formed by the intersection of the outer surface of the enclosing wall of the building and the surface of the ground.

g. BUILDING PERMIT - A written authorization granted by the Building Official to an applicant allowing him to proceed with the construction of a specific project after plans, specifications and other pertinent documents have been found to be in conformity with PD 1096 and its Implementing Rules and Regulations.

h. CERTIFICATE OF USE - A written authorization issued/granted by the Building Official after final inspection and submission of a duly certified voucher of completion that the building/structure is compliant with PD 1096.

i. DIRECTIONAL SIGN - An on-site or off-site sign that primarily provides information for directing and guiding traffic or pedestrians to parks, government institutions, landmarks, event venues, commercial spaces, villages, etc.

--- [Page 4] ---
Page 4 of 27
Ord. No. 0697-21

j. DISPLAY SIGN - any material, device or structure that is arranged, intended, designed, or used as an advertisement, announcement or directory that includes a sign, sign screen, billboard or advertising device of any kind.

k. DISPLAY STAND OR Portable Stand Sign - any movable structure that is not attached to the ground or structure such as a table, showcase cabinet and the like, where goods or periodicals are displayed.

l. DISPLAY SURFACE - the entire area enclosed by the extreme limits or perimeter of a sign.

m. DISPLAY WINDOW - the portion of a building abutting the sidewalk open to public view protected by grills, screens or transparent materials for the display of goods.

n. DISTRICT DESIGN THEME: there shall be areas in the city where themes shall be the guiding principles of the design aesthetics of the place such as the blocks of Sta. Ana and R. Magsaysay Avenue, which were declared part of the Chinatown District of the City where projecting signs may be allowed consistent with this Signage Ordinance.

o. DOUBLE-FACED SIGN - an advertising sign with two adjacent faces oriented in the same direction and not more than three (3.00) meters apart the nearest points between faces.

p. EASEMENT - a kind of public open space defined under the Civil Code and other related laws that must be absolutely free of all forms of physical obstructions that can negatively affect natural light and ventilation within such space or that impede access to or the full recreational use of such space by the general public. It is the area that may lie between legally usable portions of a public or private property and natural or man-made bodies of water such as seas, rivers, lakes, esteros, canals, waterways, floodways, spillways and the like.

q. ELECTRICAL SIGN/SIGNAGE - any sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs, faces, backgrounds or outline illuminated by incandescent or fluorescent lamps or luminous tubes as part of the sign proper, neon lights included. These light sources being either external or internal.

r. ELECTRONIC SIGN- an electronically operated advertising medium like lighted electronic diodes, etc.

s. DIGITAL/ELECTRONIC BILLBOARDS - a billboard created from computer programs and software, projected or displayed using electronic devices such as projectors, LED display, board, etc.

t. GROUND SIGN - a sign with its support resting on the ground, the base of which is a single pole (pylon) and does not exceed 10.00 sq. meters as one (1) unit.

u. HIGHLY-BUILT-UP URBAN AREA - a commercial and/or industrial site which is characterized by high-rise buildings or establishments and considered a high-density area.

v. IMPRINT - a plaque or sticker or lettering to be painted on either the top or the bottom of the poster or sign as a means of identifying the company to whom the structure belongs and the permits issued therefor.

--- [Page 5] ---
Page 5 of 27
Ord. No. 0697-21

w. MULTI-FACED SIGN - an advertising sign or signboard structure with three or more faces oriented in different directions.

x. NATIONAL ROAD - any public road, classified as primary or secondary, declared as national road by the President of the Philippines upon recommendation of the Secretary of Public Works and Highways, satisfying the conditions set forth under Executive Order No. 113, Establishing the Classification of Roads.

y. NON-COMMERCIAL SIGN - is a sign that does not relate to a commercial or for-profit venture. Examples of non-commercial signs include signs containing only a political, civic, public service, or religious message; or an informational display placed by a nonprofit organization, person, or group such as advertisements of a local festival.

z. OFFICIAL SIGN - any sign setting forth information pursuant to law owned by the government.

aa. OFF PREMISE SIGN - an advertising sign or signboard structure usually located along national road that advertises goods or services that are sold or offered at a place other than where the sign or signboard is located, using free-standing upright supports or roof mounted sign.

bb. ON PREMISE SIGN - a sign or signboard structure located within the place where the goods or services are sold or offered; also called as Business Sign.

cc. NEON SIGN - a discharge lamp where the neon tube contains a large proportion of neon gas, made/outlined to project letters or characters for the purpose of advertising.

dd. POSTER - a fabricated flat surface upon which a message is either posted or painted.

ee. PROJECTING SIGN - a sign fastened to, suspended from, or supported on a building or a structure, the display surface of which is perpendicular from the wall surface or is an single from there.

ff. ROAD RIGHT-OF-WAY (RROW) - a kind of public open space for the continuous flow of pedestrians and vehicular traffic that must be free of all forms of prohibited physical obstructions. The RROW is the area lying between two (2) or more parallel properties and its width is horizontally measured from opposite property lines.

gg. ROOF SIGN - any sign installed on roofs, roof decks, parapets or eaves.

hh. SERVICE PROVIDER - owner of an advertising sign or signboard structure.

ii. SETBACK - the horizontal distance measured from the outermost face of the building/structure to the property lines that must be absolutely free of all forms of physical obstructions that can negatively affect natural light and ventilation or that can impede access to the sides and rear area.

J. SIGN - any letter, word, numeral, pictorial presentation, illustration, decoration, emblem, device, symbol or trademark, flag, banner, or pennant, or any other figure of similar character that is.

--- [Page 6] ---
Page 6 of 27
Ord. No. 0697-21

1.) Attached to, painted on, or in any manner represented on a building or structure;
2.) Used to announce, direct attention to, or advertise and visible to the public.

KK. SIGNBOARD - a broad flat piece of wood or other material bearing information and/or advertising less than six (6) square meters in area.

II. SIGN PERMIT - a written authorization granted by the Building Official to an applicant allowing him to install/attach display signs on a structure.

MM. SIGN STAND - any movable structure upon which a sign is mounted or supported.

NN. SIGN STRUCTURE - any means to support the installation of sign/signboard and this includes the structural frame, anchorages and fasteners to support and suspend such sign/signboard.

OO. STREAMER - any advertising material made of light substance such as cloth, canvas, plastic and the like, hanged or installed outdoor for public view.

PP. STRUCTURE - that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner.

QQ. TRANSIT ADVERTISING - an advertisement placed on, or in any mode of transport such as bus, taxis, jeepsneys and motorcycles including transport precincts such as bus stops, subway entries, fuel stations and others.

RR. TEMPORARY SIGN - advertisement/announcement using cloth or other light and combustible material with or without frame and installed for a limited period.

SS. WALL SIGN - a sign painted on, attached or fastened to the surface of the wall or any part of the building or structure, the display surface of which is parallel to the wall surface.

CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PROVISIONS

SECTION 6. GENERAL PROVISIONS

a. Signs shall promote and uphold the public good especially in historical monuments and shrines, natural scenic areas, parks, parkways and their immediate approaches. No sign shall be erected or installed in the above-mentioned areas at a distance of at least 50 meters from the periphery of said areas. However, such condition shall not strictly apply when signs and sign structures are in highly built-up areas.

b. Signs, which are written in foreign language, shall have a corresponding translation either in English, in Filipino or in the local dialect.

c. No sign or signboard shall be constructed as to unduly obstruct the natural view of the scenic landscape, which is likely to include the view of Mt. Apo, Davao Gulf, Davao River, and Samal Island.

--- [Page 7] ---
Page 7 of 27
Ord. No. 0697-21

d. All signs, together with all of their supports, braces, guys, and anchors, shall be properly maintained. The display of all signs shall be kept neatly painted and secured at all times.

e. No sign or signboard structure shall be placed or erected on parks and playgrounds, beside power substations, 100 meters from perimeter of residential areas, institutional and recreational zones except for non-commercial directional signs.

f. Signs shall not be attached to, installed or displayed on posts or columns of arcade.

g. Sign structures shall be designed and constructed to withstand the elements in accordance with the National Structural Code for Buildings.

h. Sign structures may be constructed only in areas where zoning regulations permit them in accordance with the accepted standards of design, construction and maintenance.

i. Plans of sign structures exceeding 3.00 meters in height from the ground or roof level shall be signed and sealed by a duly registered Architect or Civil Engineer.

j. Signs and sign structures built within highly restrictive fire zones, as determined by the Bureau of Fire Protection, shall be of combustible materials other than approved plastics shall be used in construction of electrical signs.

k. Signs and structures equipped with electrical devices shall have an electrical wiring plan conforming with the provisions of the National Electrical Code and duly signed by a Professional Electrical Engineer; However, for installations not exceeding 600 volts and 4 kilowatts, a sketch diagram and Bill of Materials, signed and sealed by an Electrical Engineer or Master Electrician who will install the same shall be sufficient. All other permits exceeding this requirement may be approved by the local power company.

l. Signs shall be placed in such a manner that no part of its surface will interfere in any way with the free use of doorway, fire escape, stand pipe, window, emergency exit or other required means of exit and fire protective devices.

m. No signs shall be erected or placed closer than a minimum of 1.00-meter distance from any electric and telephone posts or wires. Existing signs in the City Poblacion predating the requirements of subsection (n) hereof may still be allowed, provided that proper insulators from the local telephone and power companies shall be installed thereby.

n. Signs shall be erected in such a manner as not to confuse or obstruct the view or interpretation of any public sign, traffic sign or device, nor obstruct the sign, distract the attention of motorists, reflect blinding light or cause glare to incoming traffic. In cases when sign installations are belatedly found to cause confusion or obstruction to any public sign or traffic sign/device, the said installation shall be removed upon the recommendation of the Public Safety and Security Command Center (PSSCC) or the City Transport and Traffic Management Office (CTTMO) or the concerned public agency, provided removal is done with utmost care such that the sign can still be reinstalled by the registered owner in a more appropriate area, provided permit to install the sign in another location is acquired properly.

--- [Page 8] ---
Page 8 of 27
Ord. No. 0697-21

o. The bottom line of all signboards adjacent to each other shall follow a common baseline as determined by the Building Official.

p. All sign structures above 100 meters elevation from the main sea level and/or within the 5-kilometer radius from the airport, shall secure Air Transportation Office (ATO) clearance and should also follow the Height Limits Ordinance for Buildings and Structures of the City, including the height regulations set in the Zoning Ordinance.

q. Sign or signboard structures shall be provided with an appropriate device, such as pulleys, capable of being lowered jointly and severally by the owner of the sign structure and the advertising agency, upon receipt of typhoon advisory Signal Number 1 or 2 by PAGASA within the area of the sign/signboard structure.

r. Minimum clearance of free standing signs shall be 6 meters from the natural ground level.

CHAPTER 5
SPECIFIC PROVISIONS

Article 1
Advertising Sign

SECTION 7. BILLBOARD - Outdoor advertising signs shall not be allowed in a residential zone as designated in the Official Zoning Map. Adjacent billboards shall be erected in such a way as to maintain 150.00 meters unobstructed line of sight.

No billboard shall be located in a position that obstructs or obscures the view of vehicular or pedestrian traffic in such a manner as to endanger the safe movement thereof. Non-mobile billboards shall be erected in a manner that cannot confuse or obstruct the view or interpretation of any official traffic sign, signal or device.

The outermost portion or projection of a non-mobile billboard or its support structure or its lighting system shall be located at least 2.5 to 3 meters away from high tension lines as per Republic Act No. 11361.

No billboard shall be constructed on a property where the same can obscure or shade the window or doors of the adjacent building structures.

SECTION 8. REGULATED AREAS - Bridge approach areas within 200 meters of the following bridges shall be designated as "regulated areas" in order to preserve, among others, the natural view and beauty of the Davao River, Mt. Apo, the Davao City Skyline and the view of Samal Island and for the purpose of safety and security, to wit:

A.) Regulated Bridges:

1. Generoso Bridge I and II;
2. Bolton Bridge I and II;
3. Lasang Bridge;
4. Davao River Bridge (along Diversion Road Ma-a);
5. F. Torres (near San Rafael Ma-a);
6. Lipadans Bridge (at Toril District);
7. Tugbok Bridge I, II & III (near Coca Cola Bldg. Ulas, near bypass road);
8. Angalan Bridge I, II & III (Tugbok Proper to Los Amigos, Tugbok District);

--- [Page 9] ---
Page 9 of 27
Ord. No. 0697-21

9. Suyawan Bridge (in Marilag District);
10. Tamuqen Bridge (in Marilag District);
11. Laczon Bridge (in Calinan District);
12. Matina Balusong Bridge;
13. Binugao Bridge (Davao City side).

B.) As a matter of policy, the City shall no longer allow free standing or stand-alone billboards in the regulated areas.

SECTION 9. ALLOWABLE HEIGHT FOR SIGN STRUCTURES IN REGULATED AREAS - Sign structures in regulated areas shall be limited to a maximum total height of 25.00 meters from the street crown, except in areas where the ATO or the Zoning Ordinance have a lower height limit, wherefore the lower limit shall prevail, provided the first 3 meters from the street crown shall remain as open space. For this purpose, only the next 22 meters shall be allowed to be used as advertising surface. The top and bottom lines of billboards erected in said areas shall follow a common baseline as determined by the Building Official.

Advertising Sign Structures may be constructed only in areas where zoning regulation permit is given and only within the established advertising sign precincts or allowable areas within the zone and in accordance with the accepted standards of design construction and maintenance.

Outdoor advertising signs shall be permitted only in commercial or industrial zones as designed in the Official Zoning Map.

To avoid hindering interpretation of traffic control devices, advertising signs should be located:

1.) At least 100 meters on an intersection or pedestrian crossing in an urban area;

2.) At least 200 meters of an intersection or pedestrian crossing in an area with rural operating speeds;

3.) At least 100 meters of a curve with advisory speed and/or chevron signing in an urban area;

4.) At least 200 meters of a curve with advisory speed and/or chevron signing in an area with rural operating speeds.

Sizes of new signs and signboard structures vary from six (6) meters by eight (8) meters or eight (8) meters by twelve (12) meters up to two hundred twenty-five (225) square meters, depending on the location, the stability of the upright supports, and the compliance of the setback requirements and zoning classification of the site.

In cases where there is no development yet introduced by the lot owner and where maximum yard and setback ranges from twenty (20) meters or more, from the outermost edge of the RROW, the maximum height of sign/signboard structures will be twenty-five (25) meters, except for areas and zones where allowed height limit is lower.

SECTION 9.1 DISTANCE BETWEEN BILLBOARDS - For new billboard structures to be installed or erected at the same side of the road, it must have a minimum distance of one hundred (100) meters apart.

--- [Page 10] ---
**Page 10 of 27
Ord. No. 0697-21**

**Article 2
Business Signs**

**SECTION 10. ALLOWABLE SIZE FOR BUSINESS SIGNS** - Business signs shall have a length not exceeding the frontage of the lot.

**SECTION 11. SIGNS ON BUILDING** - Business signs installed, displayed or erected on the same building shall preferably be of identified size and flushed against the building façade and no perpendicular sign shall be allowed.

**SECTION 12. SIGNS IN HIGHLY BUILT-UP URBAN AREAS** - Business signs in highly built-up urban areas may not be allowed within the immediate approaches from the periphery of historical monuments, shrines, natural scenic areas, parks, parkways, murals painted on walls and fences, notwithstanding Section 6 (a) of this Ordinance.

**Article 3
Roof Signs**

**SECTION 13. NO CONSTRUCTION OF ROOF SIGNS** - No signs shall be erected, attached to, installed, fastened on roof tops of buildings of wooden structures.

**Article 4
Ground Signs**

**SECTION 14. ALLOWABLE HEIGHT FOR GROUND SIGNS** - Ground signs shall not exceed 6.00 meters in height above the street crown and in cases where there are no streets, on the ground level, and subject to other applicable provisions of this Ordinance.

**SECTION 15. LIMITATIONS** - Ground signs shall not exceed 6.00 meters in height above the street crown, or the base of said ground signs:

1. It shall be located 2.00 meters within the property line, and in no case, shall occupy the street or sidewalk, passageway, alleys, easements or river abutments.
2. Public or Government signs erected or installed within the area of the sidewalk shall be so designed and located that the same shall neither obstruct the easy passage of pedestrians nor distract the attention of motorists.

Ground signs may be constructed only in areas where zoning regulations permit them and in accordance with the accepted standards of design, construction and maintenance.

**Article 5
Projecting Signs**

**SECTION 16. PROJECTING SIGNS, IN GENERAL** - As a general rule, projecting signs will no longer be allowed projecting towards a sidewalk or street, but may be allowed in areas where it is consistent with its assigned theme such as in the identified Chinatown District of the City or other similarly themed districts duly approved by the City.

--- [Page 11] ---
Page 11 of 27
Ord. No. 0697-21

For areas within private properties, and so long as the projecting signs do not encroach towards a public sidewalk or public road, projecting signs may still be allowed, provided signs shall not extend more than 1.50 meters from the wall line or the building line.

For areas where projecting signs are consistent with the theme of the district (Chinatown area, etc.), the erection of projecting signs is subject to the following conditions:

a. On NON-ARCAGED STREETS OR WHERE ARCADES ARE PROPOSED - Signs shall not extend more than 25% of the effective width of the sidewalk or 1.5 meters from the wall line or building line extending towards a sidewalk whichever is narrower;

b. On ARCAGED STREETS - Signs shall not project more than 0.5 meter from the wall line over the street and should be installed in such a way that the sign is parallel to the wall line of the building for safety purposes;

c. BUILDINGS ABUTTING ON STREETS/ALLEYS WITHOUT SIDEWALKS OR PROVISIONS - The signs shall not project more than 0.30 meter from the outermost portion of the building/structure and should be installed in such a way that the orientation of the sign is parallel to the wall of the building.

However, a clearance of not less than 3.00 meters shall be provided below the lowest part of such signs projecting over sidewalks on buildings without arcades and a clearance of not less than 5.00 meters shall be provided below the lowest part of such signs projecting over carriage ways.

SECTION 17. INSTALLATION OF PROJECTING SIGNS - The installation of electric neon signboards or other advertisements of similar nature projecting over roadways or public streets, shall no longer be allowed, except when the area's District Theme allows for such projecting signs to be installed as explained in Section 16 hereof.

When allowed in the theme of the area, the following regulations must be observed:

a. Clear distance between the signboards installed in one building is not less than 4.00 meters;

b. Signboards on multi-storey buildings shall be installed in the same vertical line and shall not overlap each other;

c. Tops of signboards shall not extend over the topmost part of the parapet or the bottom line of the eave of the building;

d. Horizontal projection of signboards shall follow the provision of Article 5, Section 16 of this Ordinance;

e. In case of two adjacent buildings, adjacent signboards shall be placed at a distance of not less than 2.00 meters from the common boundary line;

f. Signboards shall not obstruct any window or emergency exit and shall not be closer than 1.0 meter from electric and telephone posts and wires;

g. Vertical clearances shall follow the provisions of the last paragraph of Article 5, Section 16.

--- [Page 12] ---
**Page 12 of 27
Ord. No. 0697-21**

**Article 6
Wall Signs**

**SECTION 18. WALL SIGNS ATTACHED ON BUILDINGS**
Display signs placed against the exterior surface of building shall not extend more than 0.30 meter from the wall with its lowest portion observing the 3 meters clearance from the sidewalk.

Provided that, wall signs shall not extend beyond the top and/or sides of any face of the exterior perimeter walls of the building.

Provided further, that wall signs made of combustible materials shall not be allowed while those made of incombustible materials may be allowed to cover the entire surface of blank wall, but in no case, be allowed to cover or obstruct opening.

Overhang and perpendicular signage are no longer allowed. It must be attached within the property wall, except within private properties or within areas where the District Theme is consistent with the allowance of projecting signs as enumerated in Section 16 of this Ordinance.

All signs painted or posted on the exterior surface of the buildings or structures may be considered either as business or advertising signs.

Sign stands or display stands shall not be placed on sidewalk pavement. Also, signs shall not be attached to, painted on, installed or displayed on posts or columns of arcades.

**SECTION 19. LIMITATION**
Display windows or wall signs within 3.00 meters above the sidewalk shall be flushed or recessed. Nonetheless, all signs painted or pasted on the exterior surface of buildings or structures are considered business or advertising signs.

**Article 7
Temporary Signs**

**SECTION 20. TEMPORARY SIGNS, IN GENERAL**
All temporary signs, bills, posters and the like may be installed or posted only in areas or structures allowed by this Ordinance and all applicable statutes, rules and ordinances. Temporary signs shall be allowed for one (1) month only and should be removed by the applicant/owner or service provider. The City Clerk, City Treasurer, or City Designated Representative, has the right to dismount the said sign and shall be charged equivalent cost and other penalties under the fees.

Road directional, LED and other electronic signages for private advertisement must be coordinated with CTTMB regulations and other ordinances.

**SECTION 21. DISPLAY OF STREAMERS**
Streamers strung over or across any public thoroughfare shall have the necessary permit therefor from the Building Official. The lowest point at the bottom edge of streamer shall have a minimum clearance of 4.30 meters above the pavement. Streamers must conform with existing Ordinances and in no case shall these streamers be allowed in restricted areas.

Determination of areas where streamers can be allowed shall be submitted by the CTTMB, Park Board and other appropriate bodies concerned for concurrence by the City Council. Additionally, advertising and streamer zone shall become a regular section of the Zoning Ordinance.

--- [Page 13] ---
Page 13 of 27
Ord. No. 0697-21
CHAPTER 6
Load and Stresses
SECTION 22. LOADS AND STRESSES IN GENERAL - Signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to resist wind and seismic forces as specified in the National Structural Code for Building (NSCB). All bracing systems shall be designed and constructed to transfer lateral forces to the foundations.
For signs on buildings, the dead and lateral loads shall be transmitted through the structural frame of the building to the ground in such manner so as not to overstress any of the elements thereof.
The overturning moment produced from lateral forces shall in no case exceed two-thirds of the dead-load resisting moment. Uplift due to overturning shall be adequately resisted by proper anchorage to the ground or to the structural frame of the building. The weight of earth superimposed over rooftops may be used in determining the dead load resisting the moment. Such earth shall be carefully placed and thoroughly compacted.
SECTION 23. WIND LOADS - Signs or sign structures should pass the wind load requirement as specified under the National Structural Code of the Philippines (NSCP).
SECTION 24. SEISMIC LOADS - Signs or sign structures shall be designed and constructed to resist seismic forces as specified in Chapter 2 of the National Structural Code of the Philippines (NSCP).
SECTION 25. COMBINED LOADS - Wind and seismic loads need not be combined in the design of signs or sign structures, only loads producing larger stress need to be used. Vertical design loads, except roof live loads, shall be assumed to be acting simultaneously with the wind or seismic loads.
SECTION 26. ALLOWABLE STRESSES - The design of wood, concrete, or steel members shall conform with the Structural Code for Building. Loads, both vertical and horizontal, exerted on the soil shall not produce stresses exceeding those specified in Chapter 7 of the National Structural Code of the Philippines (NSCP).
The working stresses of guy wire ropes or cables and the fasteners (deadman) shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the ultimate strength of the wire or fastener. Working stresses for wind or seismic loads combined with dead loads may be increased as specified in Chapter 2 of the National Structural Code of the Philippines (NSCP). All steel guy wires shall be provided with buckles for tightening.
Article 8
LED Billboards
SECTION 27. LED AND VIDEO BILLBOARD GUIDELINES - LED and Video billboard displays shall conform with the following guidelines:
a.) Its brightness shall not exceed two hundred (200) Nits during nighttime and five hundred (500) Nits during daytime;
b.) LED installations should be above traffic lights;

--- [Page 14] ---
Page 14 of 27
Ord. No. 0697-21

c.) Transitions should be fade to black;
d.) Such displays may be turned on as early as 6:00 a.m. and shall be turned off not later than 11:00 p.m.;
e.) Road directional, LED and other electronic signages for private advertisements must be coordinated with CTTMO and other regulations.

Article 9
Transit Ads and Ambient Ads

SECTION 28. REGULATION FOR TRANSIT ADVERTISEMENT - Any transit advertisement shall comply with the following requirements:
1.) Transit advertisement shall neither constitute a traffic hazard nor compromise the safety, comfort and convenience of passengers and the public in general;
2.) Transit advertisement must not impede, limit or obstruct in any way the driver's line of sight;
3.) All advertisement posters to be installed shall conform to the standards relative to morality, decency and public safety, in accordance with, but not limited to, government regulations and the Code of Ethics of the Ad Standards Council. No cigarette brand or product advertisements, or offensive to the senses shall be allowed;
4.) Required PUV identification and operational information shall not be hindered. Specifications of mandatory markings including, but not limited to company and/or franchise number, contact details, telephone number, address, etc., Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Rekamno Ka Re

--- [Page 15] ---
Page 15 of 27
Ord. No. 0697-21
SECTION 30. ADVERTISEMENT SPECIFICATION FOR TAXIS AND
PUBLIC UTILITY DEPOTYS (PUJ's) - Transit advertisement on PUJ's shall be limited
only to its toppers. Advertisement for taxis shall be placed on toppers, their rear back and
upper portion at the back windshield not exceeding eight inches (8") in width, but must
not in any way impede, limit or obstruct in any way the driver's line of sight and will not
in any way reduce the size of the required markings.
For taxis, the required markings such as "May Reklamo Ka? Itawag sa LTFRB
Holline 426-2515 or (0921) 448-7777" shall be located at the rear windshield, right
and left sides of the units with the required size set under Memo Circular No. 2012-008,
which is three inches (3") in height and one inch (1") in width, and in green color.
The above mandatory markings for PUJ's shall be located at the rear end of the
right and left sides of the units with the same size as of that of the taxis but using black
color.
SECTION 31. APPLICATION PROCESSING FOR TRANSIT
ADVERTISMENT - All requests for the installation of transit advertising materials on
public utility motor vehicles shall be formally filed by the operator-applicant with the
LTFRB in the same manner that regular LTFRB applications are filed with it.
Permits shall be released within one (1) month upon submission of complete
requirements. The validity of the authority shall be for a period of one (1) year counted
from the date of approval of the application. Applications with incomplete documents
shall be rejected outright.
LTFRB Clearance must be attached to the Mobile Advertisement application.
CHAPTER 7
CONSTRUCTION
Section 32. CONSTRUCTION IN GENERAL - The supports of all signs or
sign structures shall be placed on or upon private property and shall be securely built,
constructed, and erected in conformity with the requirements of this Ordinance.
Section 33. MATERIALS - Materials for construction of signs and sign
structures shall be of quality and structural grade as specified for buildings under this
Ordinance.
In the absence of specified requirements, the materials and details of
construction shall conform with the following:
1. Structural steel shall be of such quality as to conform with ASTM A 36.
Secondary members in contact with or directly supporting the display surface may be
formed out of light gauge steel, provided such members are designed in accordance with the specifications of the design of light gauge as specified in ASTM A 242 and the same shall be galvanized. Secondary members, when
formed integrally with the display surface, the minimum thickness of hot-
rolled steel members furnishing structural support for signs shall be 6.35 mm.
except that it shall be galvanized. Such members shall not be less than 3.18
mm. thick. Steel members may be connected with one galvanized bolt provided that connection is adequate to transfer the stresses in the members;

--- [Page 16] ---
Page 16 of 27
Ord. No. 0697-21

2. Anchors and supports, when made of wood and embedded in the soil, or within 150 mm., of the soil, shall all be hardwood of durable species or shall be pressure-treated with approved preservative.

CHAPTER 8
ANCHORAGE

SECTION 34. ANCHORAGE IN GENERAL - Members supporting unbraced signs shall be so proportioned so that the bearing loads on the soil, in either direction, horizontal or vertical, shall not exceed safety values.

Braced ground signs shall be anchored to resist the specified wind or seismic load acting in any direction. Anchors and supports shall be designed for safe bearing loads on the soil and for an effective resistance to pull out amounting to a force 25 percent (25%) greater than the required resistance for overturning.

SECTION 35. SIGNS ATTACHED TO BASE - Portable ground signs supported by frames or posts rigidly attached to the base shall be proportioned so that the weight and the size of the base will be adequate to resist the wind pressure.

SECTION 36. SIGNS ATTACHED TO CONCRETE - Signs attached to masonry, concrete, or steel shall be safely and securely fastened thereof by means of metal anchors, bolts, or approved expansion screws of sufficient size and anchorage to support safely the loads applied.

SECTION 37. SIGNS ATTACHED TO WOOD - No wooden blocks or plugs or anchors with wood used in connection with screws or nails shall be considered proper anchorage, except in the case of signs attached to wood framing.

CHAPTER 9
SIGN PERMIT

SECTION 38. ISSUANCE OF SIGN PERMITS - It shall be unlawful for any person, juridical or natural, to hang temporary signs, post posters or install billboards, business signs, electrical signs, ground signs, projecting signs, and roof advertising unless:

a. There is a Clearance from the Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH) for national roads and City Engineer's Office for city and barangay roads;

b. A Local/Zone Clearance must be secured from the City Planning and Development Office (CPDO) to verify if the location of the proposed construction or installation of the signage structure is applicable in the area applied for;

c. An application for a sign permit is filed with the Office of the Local Building Official and approved by the City Mayor/Local Chief Executive or the duly designated representative;

d. CAAP Clearance must be secured if the project/structure will be built within 5,000 meters radius from the outside fence of the airport;

--- [Page 17] ---
Page 17 of 27
Ord. No. 0697-21
e. The application is accompanied with location sketch plan, vicinity map signed and sealed by a licensed Geodetic Engineer (for Billboards/Signboard structures), structural design & specifications & structural analysis (for Billboard/Signboard structures) signed by a duly licensed Civil/Structural Engineer, proof of ownership or notarized Contract of Lease or written consent from the owner of the premises, Electrical Plans signed by a duly licensed Electrical Engineer and such other pertinent data as may be required by the Local Building Official;
f. Payment of sign fee is made with the Office of the City Treasurer, in accordance with Section 42 of this Ordinance;
g. For billboards, business signs, electrical signs, ground signs, projecting signs, roof signs, and wall signs, there must be compliance with the requirements and limitations imposed by this Ordinance and other applicable statutes and/or ordinances;
h. The applicant/service provider shall apply for a Certificate of Use. Upon completion, the owner shall submit an As-Built plan with specifications and a Certificate of Completion signed and sealed by their licensed Civil Engineer, who undertook the full-time inspection and supervision;
i. The applicant/service provider shall secure a Certificate of Annual Inspection. Field Inspection shall be conducted by the Office of the City Building Official (OCBO) yearly and validate the structure whether the same is structurally stable, well-maintained and that no enlargement has been done by the service provider. The assessment by OCBO and the "Certificate of Structural Stability" issued by the civil/structural engineer certifying the stability of the sign or signboard structure will be one of the basis for the renewal/issuance of the Sign Permit and Annual Inspection Certificate;
j. The service provider shall secure and submit an insurance coverage policy annually in the amount Five Hundred Thousand Pesos (P500,000.00) and or to be determined by OCBO and the City Mayor, to answer for any damage or injury caused by defective installation, improper or lack of maintenance of signs and signboard structures;
k. LTRFRB Clearance must be attached to the mobile advertisement sign application.
SECTION 39. EFFECTIVITY OF SIGN PERMIT - Sign permits shall be automatically revoked upon lapse of the following periods, to be counted from the date of issuance of an approved sign permit.
a. One (1) year for billboards, business signs, electrical signs, ground signs, projecting signs, roof signs, signboards and wall signs.

--- [Page 18] ---
Page 18 of 27
Ord. No. 0697-21

A sign permit issued under the provisions of this Ordinance shall expire and become null and void if the work authorized therein is not commenced within a period of ninety (90) days from the date of the issuance of the permit; or if the work so authorized is suspended or abandoned at any time after it has been commenced for a period of ninety (90) days from the date of the issuance of the permit; or if the work so authorized is suspended or abandoned at any time after it has been commenced for a period of ninety (90) days. Provided, that no construction and/or display shall be allowed upon abandonment, non-commendment of suspension of work unless upon payment of the sign permit fee with a corresponding surcharge of 25% of the total fees:

b. Two (2) months for posters;
c. Two (2) months for temporary signs;
d. Two (2) months for other advertising;
e. A day after the event has lapsed as indicated in the text of the sign.

SECTION 40. EXTENSION OF SIGN PERMITS - Extension of sign permits shall be granted upon filing of an application in accordance with Section 39 and payment of sign fee in accordance with Section 42, provided, that the application and payment for extension shall be done within the period sought to be extended.

In cases where the application for extension is done beyond the period sought to be extended, the applicant shall be imposed in addition to an extension sign permit fee, a surcharge equivalent to 25% of the amount due, for reason of delay.

Provided further, that all signs and sign structures must be in good and presentable condition, as may be determined by the Building Official, until such period sought to be extended.

SECTION 41. EXEMPTION FROM SIGN PERMIT - Sign permit is not required for advertising displayed in the premises of the person displaying it, except (1) when such material is a billboard, business sign, electrical sign, ground sign, projecting sign, roof sign, signboard, and wall sign, or (2) when sponsored by advertisers/persons whose logo or name(s) appear in the sign displayed and that the said advertisers/persons are not exempt by this Ordinance.

The following are the official signs which are exempted:

1.) Official highway route number signs, street names, directional and other official government signs;
2.) Information and public service signs such as those availability of restrooms, telephone or similar public conveniences;
3.) Information and description on infrastructure projects;
4.) Official traffic signs, signals, devices and the like;
5.) Official signs for memorial or historical places; and
6.) Street sign, billboard and other signages installed for government activities and other important announcements.

--- [Page 19] ---
**Page 19 of 27
Ord. No. 0697-21**

**CHAPTER 10
FEES**

**SECTION 42. FEES - Fees for the application of Sign Permits to be paid at the Office of the City Treasurer shall be as follows:**

I. DISPLAY SURFACE

a. Sign fee shall be collected per square meter of the display surface of billboards, business signs, electrical signs, ground signs, projecting signs, roof signs, signboards and wall signs for such amount as follows:

| Type of Sign Display | Amount |
|---------------------|--------|
| Outdoor video screen | P 150.00 |
| Tri-wind billboard     | P 100.00 |
| Neon                  | P 75.00 |
| Illuminated            | P 50.00 |
| Painted-on             | P 10.00 |
| Others                | P 15.00 |

b. Posters (per piece) | P 5.00 |
c. Temporary signs (per square meter) | P 5.00 |
d. Other advertising (per square meter) | P 10.00 |
e. Building lines/staking line and Grade (fixed amount) | P 200.00 |

As per National Building Code 2007

| Type of Sign Display | Business Signs | Advertising Signs |
|---------------------|----------------|------------------|
| Neon                  | P 36.00        | P 52.00          |
| Illuminated           | P 24.00        | P 36.00          |
| Others               | P 15.00        | P 18.00          |
| Painted-on            | P 6.00         | P 18.00          |

Annual Renewal fees, per sq. meter of display surface or fraction thereof:

| Type of Sign Display | Business Signs | Advertising Signs |
|---------------------|----------------|------------------|
| Neon                  | P 36.00 min fee shall be P 124.00 | P 46.00 min fee shall be P 290.00 |
| Illuminated           | P 18.00 min fee shall be P 72.00 | P 38.00 min fee shall be P 150.00 |
| Others               | P 12.00 min fee shall be P 40.00 | P 20.00 min fee shall be P 110.00 |
| Painted-on            | P 3.00 min fee shall be P 30.00 | P 12.00 min fee shall be P 100.00 |

II. STRUCTURE

Erection of support for any signboard, billboard, and the like shall be charged a fee as follows:

1. Up to 4 square meters of signboard | P 120.00 |
2. In every square meter or fraction thereof | P 50.00 |

--- [Page 20] ---
**Page 20 of 27**
**Ord. No. 0697-21**

**SAMPLE COMPUTATION:**

For sign structure with height = 15 m & display area = 225 sq.m.

1. **Building Permit Fee:**
   - **A. Structure:**
     1) First 10.00m in height --------------- P 2,400
     2) Every meter or a fraction thereof at P 120 ----------------------------- P 600
     Total Building Permit Fee -------------- P 3,000

   - **B. Excavation:**
     Per cu.m. of excavation for foundation = P 4.00
     Assumed volume/cu.m. = 25cu.m.
     25 x P 4.00 = P 100
     Total Building Permit Fee = P 3,100

2. **Sign Permit Fee:**
   - **A. Erection/Anchorage of display area (single face) up to 1.00 sq. meters = P 120 --------------- P 480.00
     221 x P 24.00 ------------------------- P 5,204.00
     Total Sign Permit = P 5,784.00

   - **B. Installation per sq. meter or fraction thereof of display area. Advertising Signs (Illuminated) = P 36.00
     225 sq.m. x P 36.00 ------------------------ P 8,100.00
     Total Sign Permit = P 13,884.00
     (Note: Excluding Electrical & Other Accessories)

3. **Certificate of Use:**
   - **A. 50% of Building Permit Fee excluding Excavation = P3,000.00 x 0.50 --------------- P 1,500.00**

4. **Annual Inspection Fee (Structure):**
   - **A. 100% of Building Permit Fee, excluding Excavation = P3,000.00 x 1.00 ------------------- P 3,000.00**

5. **Annual Renewal Fee (Staghboard):**
   - **A. Per sq. meter of display area = P 38.00
     225.00 x 225.00 sq.m. ---------------------- P 8,550.00**

III. RENEWAL FEE.

Renewal of sign permit shall include among others the corresponding payment for the display surface and support structure of the sign as determined in accordance with this Section and Section 40 of this Ordinance.

IV. OTHER FEES.

Sign fees paid under this Ordinance shall be without prejudice to an additional payment or electrical permit fee for signs with electrical devices as required in accordance with the provisions of the National Building Code.

--- [Page 21] ---
Page 21 of 27
Ord. No. 0697-21

V. FEES AND INVENTORY OF BILLBOARDS / SIGNBOARDS:
Fees covering the assessment and inventory of signs or signboard structures:
a. A one-time signboard inventory fee of Two Thousand Five Hundred Pesos (P2,500.00);
b. Annual inspection fee of Seven Thousand Five Hundred Pesos (P7,500.00).

SECTION 43. EXEMPTION FROM SIGN FEE - Sign fees are not required for the following advertising, but in no case shall the same be exempted from taking a sign permit as thereof provided:
a. Those displayed by government agencies and/or offices either national or local;
b. Those which are charitable, religious in nature and for civic purposes; except when sponsored by advertisers/persons whose logo or name/s appear on the sign displayed, said advertisers/persons are not exempt by law. However, they shall be subject to an administrative fee of P10.00 per location where such signs/streamers are installed;
c. Those displayed in the premises of the person displaying it, if the material does not exceed 6.00 square meters in area except: (1) when it is a billboard, business sign, electrical sign, ground sign, projecting sign, roof sign, signboard, and wall signs, or (2) when sponsored by advertisers/persons whose logo or name/s appear in the sign displayed, said advertisers/persons are not exempt by law.

Provided, however, that this exemption shall not relieve the owner from responsibility in case of any accident arising out of that design, construction, installation, maintenance and removal of signs displayed or exhibited.

CHAPTER 11 MARKING REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 44. MARKING REQUIREMENTS - It shall be unlawful for any person who has been issued a permit to install, erect, construct, post, paste, hang or attach advertising signs unless the same bear the following:
a. The name or names of the structure owner;
b. Contact Number;
c. The signage permit number and its date of issuance;
d. The duration of the display which shall not exceed the period stated in Section 39 of this Ordinance.

SECTION 45. EXEMPTION FROM THE MARKING REQUIREMENT - Marking is not required for advertising displayed in the premises of the person displaying it, except (1) when such material is a billboard, business sign, electrical sign, ground sign, projecting sign, roof sign, signboard and wall sign, or (2) when sponsored by advertisers/persons whose logo or name/s appear in the sign displayed, said advertisers/persons are not exempt by law.

--- [Page 22] ---
Page 22 of 27
Ord. No. 0697-21
CHAPTER 12
RESTRICTED AREAS
SECTION 46. RESTRICTED AREAS - It shall be unlawful for any person to
install or display any advertising in the following areas:
a. Across public thoroughfares;
b. On any electrical post along streets, islands;
c. On parks and playgrounds;
d. On church and school fences;
e. On sidewalks and public walking sheds;
f. Traffic light posts;
g. On bridges and bridge approaches (for streamers);
h. On trees along main streets or thoroughfares;
i. Pedestrian overpasses and fly-overs;
j. Waiting sheds.
SECTION 47. EXEMPTION - Exemption from the prohibition stated in the
preceding provision are advertisements displayed by or by authority of a government
agency, whether national or local, provided such materials are covered with a prior sign
permit from the Office of the Local Building Official, which shall be removed upon expiry
date as indicated in the sign permit.
FIGURE 1
SAMPLE BILLBOARD MARKING REQUIREMENT ILLUSTRATIONS
MAX HEIGHT = 25 M
MAX AREA = 225 SQ. M.
SEE FIGURE 2
NATURAL GROUND
FOUNDATIONS

--- [Page 23] ---
Page 23 of 27
Ord. No. 0697-21
FIGURE 2
1,20 METERS
NAME/ SERVICE PROVIDER-
CONTACT NUMBER -
SIGNAGE PERMIT NUMBER-
DURATION OF DISPLAY -
0.30 METERS
NOTE: TAGGING ID BACKGROUND IS WHITE
SECTION 48. SIGNBOARD/BILLBOARD USED FOR THEIR OWN
ESTABLISHMENTS AND THEIR REQUIREMENTS - The following are the requirements:
a.) Signboards/Billboards within mall areas, institutions and other establishments:
a.1. Must comply standard allowable height and dimensions and must be installed only within the premises of their area of jurisdiction.
b.) Signboards/ Billboards used in Mobile Advertisements:
b.1. Must comply standard allowable dimensions;
b.2. Only allowed to approved Plate Numbers with OR & CR attached to the application with their designated routes assigned to them;
b.3. Must attach clearance from LTRFB before granting the signage permit.
c.) Signages/Billboards attached in fence:
c.1. Must attach copy of the approved fence permit where the billboard will be attached;
c.2. Must comply standard allowable height & dimensions.
d.) Signages/Billboards installed by government agencies:
d.1. Required to secure signage permit but exempted in the government fees;
d.2. Allowed to be installed within the period of the government events, activities & other important announcements;
d.3. To be installed only during approved duration & location as applied for in the permit.

--- [Page 24] ---
**Page 24 of 27**

**Ord. No. 0697-21**

**CHAPTER 13**

**MAINTENANCE AND MONITORING**

**SECTION 49. MONITORING OFFICIAL:** The Building Official has the authority to monitor and supervise the appropriateness of the location, site, design, materials, and anchorage of signs and sign structures so as to ensure that all those displayed are installed, hanged, and posted in accordance with the regulations provided in this Ordinance.

Any signs and sign structures which are not in accordance with this Ordinance may be removed by the City Engineer and/or other agencies as may be designated by the City Mayor, upon recommendation of the Building Official, provided that prior notice is given to the owner.

**SECTION 50. SIGNS AND SIGN STRUCTURES, IN GENERAL:** All advertising signs, business signs, roof signs, ground signs, projecting signs, wall signs, temporary signs, streamers, posters, and the like shall be maintained by the owner of the structure or sign. If such owner fails to maintain them for a period of thirty days from the opinion of the Local Building Official, unsafe or an eyesore, the owner and/or advertising shall, upon notice from the Local Building Official, immediately restore the sign to a safe and satisfactory condition, within fifteen (15) days from receipt of notice.

Such notice shall contain therein that non-compliance to the order within the period stipulated shall warrant the removal of the signs or sign structures.

**CHAPTER 14**

**REMOVAL OF ILLEGAL MATERIALS**

**SECTION 51. RIGHT TO COMPLY:** The Outdoor Advertising materials or Signage not compliant under this Ordinance shall be given the right to comply with the regulations under this Ordinance. The parties are given six (6) months from the date of the effectiveness of the Ordinance to comply with the regulations intended to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance. Failure to comply with the removal of such outdoor advertising materials or signage pursuant to Section 53 of this Ordinance.

**SECTION 52. NON-OBSERVANCE OF THIS ORDINANCE:** Existing signs without permit and not in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance shall be altered to conform to the same. The owner shall secure the necessary permit not later than thirty (30) days from receipt of notice from the Building Official.

In case of failure to secure permit within the grace period, the sign shall be removed by the owner. Failure of the owner to remove the same, the City Engineer, upon recommendation of the Building Official, shall cause the removal of the sign at the expense of the displaying party.

**SECTION 53. REMOVAL:** The City Engineer or his authorized representatives shall remove, upon recommendation of the Building Official, the following at the expense of the displaying party:

1. Those displayed without permit from the Local Building Official, provided that the displaying party shall be given a reasonable period of sixty (60) days from receipt of the notice to comply with the sign permit requirement provided hereof;

--- [Page 25] ---
Page 25 of 27
Ord. No. 0697-21

2. Those displayed with a permit but without bearing the necessary permit marking requirement as provided in Section 44 hereof, provided that the displaying party shall be given a reasonable period of sixty (60) days from receipt of the notice to comply with the marking permit requirement provided hereof;

3. Those displayed beyond the expiry date as provided in Section 39 hereof, however, if the displaying party intends to renew such permit even beyond the period sought to be extended, the same shall be given a reasonable period of sixty (60) days from receipt of the notice to comply with the renewal requirement provided hereof without prejudice to the payment of surcharge of 25% of the total fees for such delay;

4. Those displayed in public places and/or structures as stated in Section 46;

5. Those billboards, business signs, electrical signs, ground signs, projecting signs, roof signs, or wall signs which are installed or constructed in violation of this Ordinance or other applicable statutes and ordinances.

CHAPTER 15
PENALTY

SECTION 54. PENALTY - Any person, whether natural or juridical, found violating the provisions of this Ordinance shall be penalized as follows:

a. For the first offense, a fine of not less than P1,500.00 but not more than P3,000.00, or an imprisonment of not less than seven (7) days but not more than one (1) month, or both, at the discretion of the court;

b. For the second or subsequent offenses, a fine of not less than P3,000.00 but not more than P5,000.00, or an imprisonment of not less than one (1) month and one (1) day but not more than two (2) months, or both, at the discretion of the court.

In case the violation is in pursuance of the business of the violator, it shall be meted with a penalty of revocation of business permit, upon the second or subsequent offenses.

In case the violation has been committed by a juridical person, the person in charge of management and who has knowledge thereof shall be held responsible.

CHAPTER 16
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS

SECTION 55. EXISTING SIGNS IN GENERAL - Signs with permits which were erected before the adoption of this Ordinance but not conforming thereto shall be given a grace period of six (6) months from the effectiveness of the Ordinance to conform to the same, which period shall start from the receipt of said notice.

--- [Page 26] ---
**Page 26 of 27
Ord. No. 0697-21**

In case of failure to secure the necessary permit within the grace period, the existing signs shall be removed by the owner at his expense. Failure of the owner to remove the sign, the Building Official shall order the removal of the same at the expense of the owner.

**SECTION 56. TRANSITORIAL CLAUSE AND NON-Conforming Billboards:**
Within six (6) months from the date of the effectivity of this Ordinance, any non-conforming non-mobile billboard, including those designed/constructed in full compliance with the NBC and its IRR and ARR, or in compliance with the LGU Building Code or Ordinances existing as of the approval of this Ordinance, may be dismantled, removed, or altered without violating the provisions of this Ordinance. The cost of dismantling, removal, or alteration shall be charged to the owner or operator of the non-complying billboard. The owners or operators of such altered billboards shall thereafter secure a Certificate of Compliance/Completion from the appropriate government agency, the required permits, and pay the necessary fees.

**SECTION 57. VALIDATING PERMIT:**
Existing signs without permit but conforming to the provisions of this Ordinance shall be allowed to remain provided that the owner shall obtain a validating permit within thirty (30) days from receipt of the notice from the Local Building Official. Failure to obtain a validating permit within the given grace period shall subject the applicant to additional imposition in addition to the sign permit fee, equivalent to one hundred percent (100%) of the amount due for such delay.

**CHAPTER 17 FINAL PROVISIONS**

**SECTION 58. SEPARABILITY Clause:**
If any provision of this Ordinance is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the remaining provisions not affected thereby shall continue to be in full force and effect.

**SECTION 59. REPEALING Clause:**
Any existing Ordinance or parts thereof which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

**SECTION 60. EFFECTIVITY:**
This Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon its publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Davao.

ENACTED, on the 7th day of September, 2021, by a unanimous vote of all the Members of the Sangguniang Panlungsod (City Government Department Head II).

CERTIFIED CORRECT:

CHARITO N. SANTOS
Secretary to the Sangguniang Panlungsod
(City Government Department Head II)

--- [Page 27] ---
Page 27 of 27
Ord. No. 0697-21
ATTESTED:
EDGAR P. IBUYAN JR.
President Pro Tempore
Temporary Presiding Officer
cns/kjtq
APPROVED: NOV 0 2 2021
SARA Z. DUTERTE
City Mayor
ATTESTED:
ATTY. ZULEIKA T. LOPEZ
City Administrator
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 92, SERIES OF 2000, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS "AN ORDINANCE REGULATING THE CONSTRUCTION, REPAIR, RENOVATION, ASSEMBLY, INSTALLATION, AND MAINTENANCE OF OUTDOOR ADVERTISING MATERIALS AND SIGNAGES AND FOR RELATED PURPOSES"
