=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 0585-21 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
Republic of the Philippines
City of Davao
Office of the Sangguniang Panlungsod

19th City Council
18th Regular Session
Series of 2021

-PRESENT:

Councilor Edgar P. Ibuyan Jr.
Councilor Ralph O. Abella
Councilor Nilo D. Abelerra
Councilor Maria Belen S. Acosta
Councilor Bai Hundra Cassandra Dominique N. Advincula
Councilor Wilberto E. Al-ag
Councilor Conrado C. Baluran
Councilor Conrado C. Baluran
Councilor Jessica M. Bonguyan
Councilor Louie John J. Bonguyan
Councilor Pilar C. Braga
Councilor Augusto Javier G. Campos III
Councilor Danilo C. Dayandhirang
Councilor Edgar R. Ibuyan Sr.
Councilor Edgar R. Ibuyan Sr.
Councilor Richlyn N. Justol-Baguiod
Councilor Pamela A. Librado-Morata
Councilor Diosdado Angelo Junior R. Mahipus
Councilor Jaffar U. Marchomsalic
Councilor Boniface E. Militao
Councilor Antonio G. Principe-Oritz
Councilor Artoinette G. Principe-Castrodes
Councilor J. Melchor B. Quitain Jr.
Councilor Alberto T. Ungab
Councilor Mary Joselle D. Villafuerte
Councilor Jesus Joseph P. Zozobraño III

ABSENT:

Vice Mayor Sebastian Z. Duterte
- On Official Business

ORDINANCE NO. 0585-21
Series of 2021

AN ORDINANCE CREATING THE CITY WORKERS PROTECTION AND DEVELOPMENT OFFICE OF DAVAO CITY UNDER THE OFFICE OF THE CITY MAYOR, DEFINING ITS FUNCTIONS AND OBJECTIVES, ALLOCATING FUNDS THEREOF AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

--- [Page 2] ---
Page 2 of 9
Ord. No. 0585-21

Be it ordained by the Sangguniang Panlungsod of Davao City in session assembled, that:

SECTION 1. TITLE. - "This Ordinance shall be known as 'AN ORDINANCE CREATING THE CITY WORKERS PROTECTION AND DEVELOPMENT OFFICE OF DAVAO CITY UNDER THE OFFICE OF THE CITY MAYOR, DEFINING ITS FUNCTIONS AND OBJECTIVES, ALLOCATING FUNDS THEREOF AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES'."

SECTION 2. PURPOSE. - It is the purpose of this Ordinance to protect the rights of the labor force and ensure the well being of all workers within its jurisdiction and provide them with proper information of their rights and access to protection of their welfare.

SECTION 3. COVERAGE. - This Ordinance shall apply to all workers, whether residents of Davao City or not, and all employers whose place of business is found within the territorial jurisdiction of the City of Davao. This also includes workers assigned outside the jurisdiction of Davao City but the main/head office is located in Davao City;

SECTION 4. DEFINITION OF TERMS. - As used in this Ordinance, the terms below shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section and as defined in the Labor Code. Any words or terms not defined shall be given their plain and customary meanings, unless the context requires otherwise, and shall be interpreted in a manner consistent with the purpose and spirit of this Ordinance.

1. Worker - means any member of the labor force, whether employed or unemployed.

2. Handicapped Workers - are those whose earning capacity is impaired by age or physical or mental deficiency or injury.

3. Employee - includes any person in the employ of an employer. The term shall not be limited to the employees of a particular employer, unless the Labor Code so expressly states. It shall include any person who has been dismissed as a result of or in connection with any current labor dispute or because of any unfair labor practice which has not obtained any substantially equivalent and regular employment. It refers to a person in the service of another under any contract of hire, express or implied, oral or written, where the employer has the power or right to control and direct the employee in the material details of how the work is to be performed.

4. Overseas Filipino Workers - refers to any person who is a documented worker and receiving compensation for such works outside of the Philippines while in the service of an employer in a state of which he or she is not a legal resident; to be used interchangeably with migrant workers or OFWs, as defined under Republic Act No. 8042 or the Migrant Workers Act of 1995, as amended by Republic Act No. 10022 or An Act Amending Republic Act No. 8042, or any other applicable laws for overseas workers (taken from the OFW Families Welfare and Crisis Center Ordinance of Davao City).

5. Solo Parent - any individual who falls under any of the following categories:

(1) A woman who gives birth as a result of rape and other crimes against chastity even without a final conviction of the offender: Provided, that the mother keeps and raises the child;

--- [Page 3] ---
Page 3 of 9
Ord. No. 0585-21

(2) Parent left solo or alone with the responsibility of parenthood due to the death of spouse.

(3) Parent left solo or alone with responsibility of parenthood while the spouse is delinquent or is serving sentence for a criminal conviction for at least one (1) year;

(4) Parent left solo or alone with the responsibility of parenthood due to physical and/or mental incapacity of spouse as certified by a public medical practitioner;

(5) Parent left solo or alone with the responsibility of parenthood due to legal separation or de facto separation from spouse for at least one (1) year, as long as he/she is entrusted with the custody of the children;

(6) Parent left solo or alone with the responsibility of parenthood due declaration of nullity of annulment of marriage as decreed by a court or by a church as long as he/she is entrusted with the custody of the children;

(7) Parent left solo or alone with the responsibility of parenthood due to abandonment of spouse for at least one (1) year;

(8) Unmarried mother/father who has preferred to keep and rear her/his child/children instead of having others care for them or give them up to a welfare institution;

(9) Any person who solely provides parental care and support to a child or children;

(10) Any family member who assumes the responsibility of head of family as a result of the death, abandonment, disappearance or prolonged absence of the parents or solo parent.

A change in the status of circumstance of the parent claiming benefits under this Act, such that he/she is no longer left alone with the responsibility of parenthood, shall terminate his/her eligibility for these benefits. (Solo Parents' Welfare Act of 2000.)

6. Women in the entertainment industry - as minimum wage earner, not included in raid, to be rescued and not discriminated. Seats for women workers - pregnant, separate toilet, breastfeeding workers (see Women's Development Code of the City)

7. Senior citizen or elderly - refers to any resident citizen of the Philippines at least sixty (60) years old (Expanded Senior Citizens Act of 2010).

8. Persons with Disability - are those who have long-term physical, mental, intellectual or sensory impairments which in their interaction with various barriers may hinder their full and effective participation in society on an equal basis with others.

9. Contractual employee - includes one employed by a contractor or subcontractor to perform or complete a job, work or service, pursuant to an arrangement between the latter and a principal.

--- [Page 4] ---
Page 4 of 9
Ord. No. 0585-21

10. Barangay Workers – these include Barangay officials and members who may be designated by law or ordinance and charged with the maintenance of public order, protection and security of life and property, or the maintenance of a desirable and balanced environment of the Barangay.

11. Employer – includes any person acting in the interest of an employer, directly or indirectly. The term shall not include any labor organization or any of its officers or agents except when acting as an employer. It also refers to a person or organization that hires people to perform work in exchange for compensation. Most countries have legislation governing relationships between employers and the people they hire, setting out the rights and responsibilities of each.

12. Construction Workers – those who are employed in the construction industry, namely: general building construction, general engineering construction, and special trade construction, based on the classification code of the Philippine Accreditation Board of Construction Industry Authority of the Philippines; to companies and entities involved in demolition works; and to those falling within the construction industry as determined by the Secretary of Labor and Employment.

13. BPO Workers – those who are employed in a central customer service where agents or customer care specialists or customer service representatives handle business-related telephone calls (or e-mail) and other IT-related activities on behalf of a client.

14. Labor Organizations – means any union or association of employees which exists in whole or in part for the purpose of collective bargaining or of dealing with employers concerning terms and conditions of employment.

15. Labor or Industrial Dispute – includes any controversy or matter concerning terms or conditions of employment or the association or representation of persons in negotiating the fixing, maintaining, changing or arranging of terms and conditions of employment regardless of whether or not the disputants stand in proximate relationship of employers and employees.

16. Regular Working Hours – the normal hours of work of any employee shall not exceed eight (8) hours a day. It shall include all time during which an employee is required to be on duty and/or to be at a prescribed workplace; all time during which an employee is permitted to work; and rest periods of short duration during working hours. (Labor Code Book III, Article 83 and recent jurisprudence)

17. Overtime Pay – refers to the additional compensation for work performed beyond eight (8) hours a day, which consists of an additional compensation equivalent to his regular wage plus at least 25% thereof. Work performed beyond eight hours on a holiday or rest day shall be paid an additional compensation equivalent to the rate of the first eight hours plus at least 30% thereof.

18. Holiday Pay – refers to the payment of the regular daily wage for any unworked regular holiday.

--- [Page 5] ---
Page 5 of 9
Ord. No. 0585-21

A. For Regular Holidays: The employee is entitled to at least 100% of his or her minimum wage rate even if he/she did not report to work, provided she/he is present or is on leave of absence with pay on the work day immediately preceding the holiday. Worked performed on that day merits at least twice (200%) of the daily wage of the employee.

As used in this provision, "holiday" includes: New Year's Day, Maundy Thursday, Good Friday, the ninth of April, the first of May, the twelfth of June, the fourth of July, the thirtieth of November, the twenty-fifth and thirtieth of December, and the day designated by law for holding a general election.

B. For Special Days: Work performed on special days merits additional compensation of at least thirty (30%) of the basic wage or a total of one hundred thirty percent (130%). Where the employee works on a special day falling on his rest day, he/she shall be entitled to an additional compensation of at least fifty percent (50%) of his/her basic wage or a total of one hundred fifty percent (150%). Note that workers who are not required or permitted to work on special days are not entitled to any compensation.

Unless otherwise modified by law, order, or proclamation, the following are the four (4) special days in a year under Executive Order No. 292, as amended by Republic Act 9849, as further amended by Republic Act No. 109661, that shall be observed in the Philippines: Ninoy Aquino Day, Monday nearest August 21, All Saints Day November 1, Feast of the Immaculate Conception of Mary December 8, Last Day of the Year December 31.

19. Service Incentive Leave: Every employee who has rendered at least one year of service shall be entitled to a yearly service incentive leave of five days with pay.

20. Minimum Wage Earner: This refers to salaried individuals earning a compensation of the daily minimum wage rates as determined by the Regional Tripartite Wages and Productivity Board (RTWPB).

SECTION 5. CREATION OF WORKERS PROTECTION AND DEVELOPMENT OFFICE (WPDQ) OF DAVAO CITY: The Workers Protection and Development Office (WPDQ) of Davao City shall be created under the Office of the City Mayor to protect the rights of the labor force and ensure the well-being of all workers within its jurisdiction and provide them with proper information of their rights and access to protection of their welfare. As such, a separate ordinance outlining the positions of the personnel under this office will be drafted to ensure the full function of the WPDQ.

SECTION 6. FUNCTIONS AND OBJECTIVES OF THE OFFICE: The functions of the Davao City Workers Protection & Development Office (WPDQ) are as follows:

a. To initiate the organizing of Davao City Workers Council composed of:
i. Representative from the Barangay;
ii. Representative from Ununionized Sector;
iii. Representative from Associations;
iv. Representative from Labor Unions located in Davao City

--- [Page 6] ---
Page 6 of 9
Ord. No. 0585-21

b. To supervise the Barangay Employment Service Desk (BESD) of the City and ensure its creation and submission of quarterly status report on employment services and reports within their respective jurisdiction;
c. To produce educational and informational materials on the protection and promotion of basic rights of workers;
i. Coordinate with DepEd, TESDA, Committee on Education for Information campaign, City Mayor's Office, PESO, DOLE, and NGOs
ii. Coordinate with Labor Unions to assist in the information dissemination
d. To recommend sustainable livelihood programs for unemployed/displaced workers in coordination with DOLE, PESO, and other government offices;
e. To conduct research and provide trainings on the enforcement of general labor standards, occupational safety and health standards, social welfare laws, and other pertinent laws affecting the welfare of the workers;
f. To launch regular consultations with Davao City workers, employers, and labor organizations based on the principles of shared responsibility to promote understanding and industrial peace based on social justice;
g. To conduct research on enforcement of labor standards (which includes pre-employment, human resources development, trainings, working conditions, implementation of proper wage rates, health, safety, and social welfare benefits of workers), which shall include:
i. Implementation of labor standards (statutory benefits like SSS, Philhealth, HDMF, and Social Security Benefits);
ii. Inspection of workplace by DOLE (by DOLE Inspectors, Insert Victrorial Powers to do inspection of workplace and worker's condition through Labor Leaders and Management/Deputized Labor Inspectors);
iii. Implementation of occupational safety for workers;
iv. Implementation of Safe Spaces Act, Sexual Harassment in the Workplace, Gender and Development Laws and Policies and new laws in the workplace;
h. To enforce strict implementation of labor standards on employers and companies and monitor the same;
i. To facilitate issues and concerns on labor relations (in coordination with various government agencies in charge of labor dispute, labor organizations, unions, unfair labor practices, CBA's and CNA's, strikes and lockouts and post employment) as defined by existing and relevant laws and statutes on labor and employment and coordinate with DOLE;
j. To lead in the organizing of the City's activities for the annual commemoration of Labor Day every 1st day of May;

--- [Page 7] ---
Page 7 of 9
Ord. No. 0585-21

k. To organize activities related to promotion of rights and welfare of women workers, solo parent's workers, qualified differently abled persons, abled workers with special needs and senior citizens and handicapped workers;

I. To coordinate with existing local government offices engaged in Gender and Development (GAD), advocate and implement the same in all workplace;
a. To establish an official Hotline or Social Media Accounts of WPDO and maintain an official contact number for BESD and publication of directory which includes PESO, DOLE, WPO and Barangay BEDO, Labor Unions, Associations, Child Labor Focal Person, Task Force Against Child Labor, GAD, etc.
m. To organize a network of volunteer lawyers and paralegal to assist and provide free legal services for workers, to wit:
i. To assist in reaching an amicable settlement between the parties involved;
ii. To prepare Drafting of Position Papers to be submitted to the NLRC;
iii. To provide free legal advice/assistance for and in behalf of workers;

SECTION 7. CREATION OF BARANGAY EMPLOYMENT DESK OFFICE (BEDO). Each barangay shall have a Barangay Employment Desk Office (BEDO) which shall have the following functions:

b. To develop and maintain an up-to-date quantitative and qualitative barangay-level inventory and registry of the city's labor resource and employers within their jurisdiction which shall include:
i. Profile of workers (child, OFW, Women Workers, Senior Citizens, government employee, private employer, contractor, joint order employees, small and medium employers, agency workers, etc.)
ii. Inventory of employed and unemployed
iii. Inventory of different employers within the barangay - small, medium and large companies - employing workers;
c. To establish an official hotline for workers in the barangay level and publication of directory for PESO, DOLE, WPO and Barangay BEDO, Labor Unions, Associations, Child Labor Focal Person, Task Force Against Child Labor, GAD, etc.
d. To conduct physical and/or virtual job fairs in the barangay, pre-employment seminar, and career employment coaching, in schools in the barangay level in coordination with PESO, and DOLE labor-related activities and programs in the barangay level, including national agencies such as SSS, PHC, NBI, Police Clearance, and barangay office for employment requirements;
e. To refer legal labor concerns to the office of WPDO, Davao City Task Force Against Child Labor, and proper authorities and offices;

--- [Page 8] ---
Page 8 of 9
Ord. No. 0585-21
f. To initiate the organizing of independent barangay-level workers' organizations within their respective jurisdiction;
g. To implement the Skills Registry System in the barangay level as repository of information on the livelihood skills and available jobs in a particular barangay;
h. To organize barangay and city-level lectures and seminars on the basic rights of workers and coordinate with DepEd, TESDA, Committee on Education for information campaign, City Mayor's Office, PESO, DOLE, NGOs and Labor Unions to assist in the information dissemination.
SECTION 8. BUDGET, FUNDING AND ALLOCATION. - The budget and funding to defray the expenses necessary for the operational and administrative requirements of the WPDO OF DAVAO CITY and expenses incidental to the implementation of this Ordinance shall be sourced and charged to available funds as part of the Special Programs of the City Mayor charged to the annual budget, which shall include, but are not limited to:
a. Cost of Operating Expenses in the City, and all Barangay activities and supplies in implementing Worker's Protection and creation of BEDO;
b. Cost of printing of training, information and communication materials;
c. Cost of conduct of research and consultations with other agencies, local and international non-government organizations and labor organizations;
d. Cost of enforcement of the purpose of WPDO in the barangay level including allowances for meals and transportation expenses that may be incidental thereto;
e. Services and salaries of WPDD staff, lawyers, paralegal and consultants;
f. Other expenses associated with the implementation and enforcement of this Ordinance.
SECTION 9. REPEALING CLAUSE. - All Ordinances contrary to or inconsistent with this Ordinance are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.
SECTION 10. SEPARABILITY CLAUSE. - If any part or provision of this Ordinance is declared unconstitutional or invalid, the same shall not affect the validity and effectivity of the other parts of the provisions hereof.
SECTION 11. EFFECTIVITY. - This Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon approval.
ENACTED, May 11, 2021, by a unanimous vote of all the Members of the Sangguniang Panlungsod (City Government Department Head II).

--- [Page 9] ---
ATTESTED:
EDGAR P. IBUYAN JR.
President Pro-Tempefe
Temporary Presiding Officer
cns/ray
APPROVED: AUG 09 2021
SARA Z. DUTERTE
City Mayor
ATTESTED:
ATTY. ZULEIKAT LOPEZ
City Administrator
AN ORDINANCE CREATING THE CITY WORKERS' PROTECTION AND DEVELOPMENT OFFICE OF DAVAO
CITY UNDER THE OFFICE OF THE CITY MAYOR, DEFINING ITS FUNCTIONS AND OBJECTIVES,
ALLOCATING FUNDS THEREOF AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES
