=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 000056-08 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
15th City Council
2nd Regular Session
Series of 2008

Republic of the Philippines
Lungsod ng Davao
Tunggapan ng Sangguniang Panlungsod

PRESENT:

Councillor
Ma. Belen S. Acosta
Councillor
Nilo G. Abellera
Councillor
Victoria S. Adviccola
Councillor
Wilbuto E. Al-Aswad
Councillor
Dante L. Apostol Sr.
Councillor
Leonardo R. Avila III
Councillor
Conrado C. Balaram
Councillor
Samuel B. Bangoy
Councillor
Karlo S. Behar
Councillor
Rafael M. Bonaguyan
Councillor
Pilar C. Braga
Councillor
Arnolfo Ricardo B. Cabiling
Councillor
Paolo Z. Duterte
Councillor
Edgar R. Ibayan
Councillor
Rafael J. Lacson
Councillor
Diosdado Angelo A. Mahipius Sr.
Councillor
Bonifacio R. Millar
Councillor
Tommy J. Monteverde IV
Councillor
Myrna CLI Delgado-Oritz
Councillor
Sesum Imbel C. Rota
Councillor
Hailin Y. Sedghe
Councillor
Angela A. Serrano-Trinidad
Councillor
Juan Luna P. Villafurte

ON OFFICIAL BUSINESS:

Vice Mayor
Sern Z. Duterte
Councillor
Danilo C. Dayanghirang
Acting City Mayor
Cebu City
ABSENT:

Councillor
Teresita C. Mata-Maratun
Councillor
Rachel F. Zazobrado
On Sick Leave
On Special Privilege Leave

ORDINANCE NO. 456-08 / & 90. 42
Series of 2008

AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING THE OVERSEAS
PHILIPPINO WORKERS CENTER OF DAVAO CITY
UNDER THE CITY MAYOR'S OFFICE AND FOR
OTHER PURPOSES

Be it ordained by the Sangguniang Panlungsod of Davao City in session
assembled, that:

--- [Page 2] ---
Page 2 of 8
Ord No. 056-08

SECTION 1. TITLE - This ordinance shall be known as "OVERSEAS FILIPINO WORKERS (OFW) CENTER ORDINANCE OF DAVAO CITY."

SECTION 2. DECLARATION OF POLICY - It shall be the policy of the Local Government of Davao City to afford full protection to labor, local and overseas, organized and unorganized, and promote full employment and equality of employment opportunities for all.

In pursuit of an independent foreign policy while considering our national sovereignty, territorial integrity, national interest and the right to self-determination paramount in its relations with other states, the Local Government of Davao City, at all times, shall uphold the dignity of its citizens whether in the country and overseas, in general, and Overseas Filipino Workers, in particular.

Towards this end, the Local Government of Davao City shall pursue and implement programs and policies that shall afford protection to OFWs and their families, promote their interests and safeguard their welfare taking into considerations their vulnerabilities and for their efforts of empowerment and self-determination and adopt and implement measures for the ultimate protection and promotion of their rights.

SECTION 3. GUIDING PRINCIPLES

1. While recognizing the significant contribution of Overseas Filipino Workers to national economy through their remittances, the Local Government of Davao City shall, in coordination with national agencies, ensure the full protection of OFWs through its programs for social services, legal protection and gender & development;

2. The existence of OFW Center of Davao City and its program rests solely on the assurance that the dignity and fundamental human rights and freedoms of Overseas Filipino Workers shall not at any time be compromised or violated;

3. The Local Government of Davao City affirms the fundamental equality before the law of women and men and recognizes the significant role of women in nation building. It shall pursue and implement a gender responsive development policy and design an integrated gender and development support systems taking into consideration women of OFWs' particular vulnerabilities for abuse, health risks and special support for their families;

4. The Filipino overseas worker, documented or undocumented, shall be adequately protected and safeguarded and shall not be denied legal assistance; free access to court and quasi-judicial bodies, and support for repatriation program shall be guaranteed.

SECTION 4. DEFINITION OF TERMS

1. OFW - refers to a person who is to be engaged, is engaged or has been engaged in a remunerated activity in a state of which he she is not a legal resident, to be used interchangeably with migrant worker;

--- [Page 3] ---
2. Overseas Filipino Workers in Distress - OFWs shall be deemed in distress in cases where they have valid medical, psychological or legal assistance problems requiring treatment, hospitalization, counseling and legal representation or any kind of intervention with the authorities in the country where they are found;

3. OFW dependents - refer to the spouse, descendants and ascendants, brothers and sisters whether legitimate or illegitimate;

4. Repatriation - For purposes of this Ordinance, repatriation refers to the transport of distressed and deceased workers including their personal belongings to Davao City;

5. Illegal Recruitment - shall mean any of the acts under Article 13(f) of the Labor Code of the Philippines and under Section 6 of Act 8042;

6. Trafficking - refers to the recruitment, transportation, transfer or harboring, or receipt of persons with or without the victim's consent or knowledge, within the jurisdiction of the Republic of the Philippines by means of threat or use of force, or other forms of coercion, abduction, fraud, deception, abuse of power or position, taking advantage of the vulnerability of the person, or the giving or receiving of payments or benefits to achieve the consent of a person having control over another person for the purpose of exploitation which includes at a minimum, the exploitation or the prostitution of, abuse of other forms of exploitation, forced labor or service, slavery, servitude or the removal or sale of organs;

7. Documented OFW - those who possess valid passports and visas or permits to stay in the host country and whose contracts of employment have been processed by the POEA if required by law or regulation, or those registered by the Philippine Embassy abroad;

8. Undocumented OFW - those who do not fall under the preceding definition;

9. Recruiting/Employment Agency - any person, partnership or corporation duly licensed by the Secretary of Labor and Employment to engage in the recruitment and placement of workers for overseas employment for a fee which is charged, directly or indirectly, from the workers or employers or both;

10. Davao City resident - a resident of Davao City of one year and is a registered Overseas Filipino Worker (OFW) member.

SECTION 5. OVERSEAS FILIPINO WORKERS CENTER OF DAVAO CITY - There shall be established an Overseas Filipino Workers Center or OFW Center of Davao City under the City Mayor's Office.

The OFW Center is an office under the City Mayor's Office which shall act as the coordinating, regulatory and monitoring body of the Local Government to focus on OFW issues and concerns and to be an office rendering direct services to any OFW and to OFW dependents.

--- [Page 4] ---
Page 4 of 8
Ord. No. 056-08

SECTION 6. FUNCTIONS - The functions of the Center include, but is not limited to, the following:

Section 6.A. Monitoring and Coordinating Functions
a. Establishes close linkages with the DOL, DPA, POEA, OWWA, and other government agencies as well as with non-government organizations assisting migrant workers, to ensure effective coordination and cooperation in all migrant workers' concerns and issues.
b. Provides the mechanism to ensure active and full participation of the private sector and the citizenry through their organizations in the planning and implementation of identified programs and projects for migrant workers.
c. Conducts research for data banking which shall serve as basis for development programs and services, in coordination with other concerned government agencies.
d. Re-integration Program for Overseas Filipino Workers

Section 6.B. Regulatory Functions
a. Ensures gender-sensitive education and trainings for all migrant workers by establishing standards of course contents integrated in their Pre-Employment Orientation Seminar (PEOS).
b. Conducts continuous OFW profiling.

Section 6.C. Direct Services
1. Provides legal assistance to include follow-through prosecution of OFWs' complaints, preliminary legal research, preparation of complaint and referral to lawyers (provided either by the Integrated Gender & Development Division and partner NGOs) should the need for court representation arise;
2. Coordinates medical, hospital, psychiatric and psycho-social intervention in coordination with the City Health Office and other concerned agencies for assistance to Overseas Filipino Workers;
3. Livelihood assistance for displaced OFWs in distress, including those OFWs who are victims of trafficking and illegal recruitment;
4. Psycho-social activities and therapy for children and families of OFWs;
5. Free direct line telephone services for OFW families and dependents;
6. Continues advocacy initiatives in the promotion of OFWs' economic, social, educational and political empowerment.

--- [Page 5] ---
Page 5 of 8
Ord. No. 056-08

7. To coordinate with concerned government agencies like OWWA, DFA, concerned enbassies, for the return of the remains of Overseas Filipino Workers to Davao City.

SECTION 7A: STAFFING PATTERN - The OPW Center shall maintain the following plantilla personnel in its operations and management:

| Number | Position | Salary Grade |
|--------|-----------|-------------|
| 1      | Development Management Officer IV | 9 |
| 1      | Development Management Officer II | 15 |
| 2      | Social Welfare Officer I | 11 |
| 1      | Legal Researcher | 13 |
| 1      | Clerk II | 04 |

Section 7A. Job Descriptions of Plantilla Positions:

a.) Development Management Officer IV

a.1 Development Management Officer IV shall act as center coordinator and oversee the activities of the OPW Center;

a.2 He/she is authorized to sign, speak, and represent the Center in relevant documents and activities;

a.3 He/She shall report directly to the City Mayor, through the City Administrator;

a.4 Details of function:
1. Conducts research, studies, and analysis of data gathered therefrom, on the basis for making workable plans and programs;
2. Formulates criteria and program objectives for determining priorities for proposed plans and programs;
3. Designs and develops operative plans and strategies of the Center through coordination with executive officers and sponsoring;
4. Performs other related functions that may, from time to time, be assigned by the immediate Chief;
5. Exercises such other powers and performs such other functions and duties as may be prescribed by the Women Development Code or any statute of the Local Government of Davao City,

b.) Development Management Officer II

b.1 The Development Management Officer II shall act as assistant center coordinator and assist the Center Coordinator in providing technical assistance and support in carrying out measures for the planning and implementation of activities and policies of the Center particularly on research development.

--- [Page 6] ---
Page 6 of 8
Ord. No. 056-08

b.2 He/She shall report directly to the Center Coordinator;

b.3 Details of Functions:

1. Coordinate with networks of organizations both Government and Non-Government Organizations in the preparation and assessment as well as in updating the Davao City Development Plan to ensure its implementation at all levels thru meetings, workshops and consultations;

2. Formulate research tools for the collection of accurate gender and age disaggregated data specifically on the conduct of OFW profiling as well as develop qualitative and quantitative indicators to facilitate the assessment of Davao City's programs for OFW;

3. Conducts research to be commissioned as well as policy research to government offices thru various approaches such as interviews, focus group discussions and survey in coordination with non-government organizations, organized OFW groups/associations for assessment and evaluation of development programs and policies;

4. Develop and initiate advocacy programs to promote OFW's economic, social and political empowerment by maintaining and strengthening media relations;

5. Prepares accomplishment reports in all activities undertaken by the Center, as well as other monitoring and evaluation reports and submits them to the immediate supervisor for review and recommendations;

6. Performs such other functions as may be assigned from time to time by the immediate supervisor and/or the Development Management Officer IV.

c) Social Welfare Officer I

c.1 Details of Function

1. Assist in the dissemination/implementation of the programs undertaken by their respective sections and submits report thereon;

2. Undertakes the monitoring of programs/projects implemented;

3. Assists in establishing networks or linkages with other government offices and NGOs to ensure efficiency, economy in the implementation of the programs to be undertaken;

4. Assists in giving assistance to individuals/groups of individuals needing the same;

5. Does other related work.

--- [Page 7] ---
Page 7 of 8
Ord. No. 056-08

d) Legal Researcher
d.1 Details of Function
1. Conducts initial inquiry/investigation of complaint brought before the Center against any recruitment or employment agency for alleged violations of laws and ordinances and makes a report to be submitted to the superior;
2. Does preliminary studies and legal research of cases assigned or submitted thereto;
3. Assists lawyers in the conduct of preliminary investigations of various cases filed before any appropriate judicial or quasi-judicial body;
4. Performs such related duties and functions as may be prescribed or required of the position.

e) Clerk II
e.1 Details of Function
1. Receives, releases, records incoming and outgoing communications;
2. Types or encodes office correspondence, memoranda, reports, payrolls and other typing/encoding work;
3. Files records according to procedure;
4. Performs other jobs that may be assigned by his/her superior;

SECTION 3: BUDGETARY REQUIREMENTS - The budget for the OPW Center's operations shall be taken from the Annual Budget and Annual Development Fund (5%) under the Social Amelioration Program.

SECTION 4: SEPARABILITY CLAUSE - If for any reason any section or provision of this Ordinance is declared unconstitutional or invalid, the other sections or provisions hereof not affected by such declaration therein shall continue to be in full force and effect.

SECTION 10: REPEALING CLAUSE - All Ordinances, local issuances or rules inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 11: EFFECTIVITY CLAUSE - This Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon its approval and after publication in a newspaper of general circulation.

--- [Page 8] ---
Page 8 of 8
Ord. No. 056-08

ENACTED, January 15, 2008, by a majority votes of all the Members of the
Sangguniang Panlungsod.
(Note: Councilors Nilo G. Abellara, Tomas J. Mostevoe IV and Dionado
Angelo A. Malipius Sr. were out when this ordinance was approved.)
CERTIFIED CORRECT:
ZULEKKA T. LOPEZ
Secretary to the Sangguniang Panlungsod
(City Government Department Head II)
ATTESTED:
MA. BELEN S. ACOSTA
Acting Vice Mayor
APPROVED: APR 11 2009
RODRIGUEZ DUTERTE
City Mayor
ATTESTED:
WENDEL E. AVISADO
City Administrator
