=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 0333-20 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
Republic of the Philippines
City of Davao
Office of the Sangguniang Panlungsod

19th City Council
30th Regular Session
Series of 2020

PRESENT:
Councillor Edgar P. Ibayuan Jr.
Vice Mayor Sebastian Z. Duterte
Councillor Ralph O. Abella
Councillor Nilo D. Abelella
Councillor Maria Belen S. Acosta
Councillor Bai Hundra Cassandra Dominique N. Advincula
Councillor Dante L. Apostol Sr.
Councillor Conrado B. Baluran
Councillor Jessica M. Bonguyan
Councillor Louie John J. Bonguyan
Councillor Pilar C. Braga
Councillor Augusto Javier G. Campos III
Councillor Danilo C. Dayanghirang
Councillor Jovencio D. Diaz
Councillor Edgar R. Ibayuan Jr.
Councillor Richlyn N. Justol-Baguilod
Councillor Pamela A. Librado-Morata
Councillor Diosdado Angelo Junior R. Mahipus
Councillor Jaffar U. Marohomsalic
Councillor Myrna G. L'Dalobo-Ortiz
Councillor Josepina M. Lopez-Castrores
Councillor J. Melchor B. Quitan
Councillor Alberto T. Ungab
Councillor Mary Joselle D. Villafuerte
Councillor Jesus Joseph P. Zozobraado III

ABSENT:
Councillor Bonifacio E. Militar

ORDINANCE NO. 0333-20
Series of 2020

AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 5004, SERIES OF 1997, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE WOMEN DEVELOPMENT CODE TO STRENGTHEN STRUCTURES AND MECHANISMS IN ADDRESSING THE EVOLVING CONCERNS OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN

--- [Page 2] ---
Page 2 of 45
Ord. No. 0333-20

Be it ordained by the Honorable Sangguniang Panlungsod of Davao City, in session assembled, that:

BOOK I - GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER I - BASIC PRINCIPLES
ARTICLE I
Title and General Policy

SECTION 1. TITLE: This Ordinance shall be known as the "WOMEN DEVELOPMENT CODE OF DAVAO CITY, AS AMENDED".

SECTION 2. DECLARATION OF POLICY AND PRINCIPLES OF THE LOCAL GOVERNMENT OF DAVAO CITY

The City Government of Davao adheres to the principle that human rights are universal and inalienable. In line with this, the City shall bear the duty to uphold the rights of women and the belief in their worth and dignity as human beings.

Hence, the City Government of Davao hereby affirms that women's rights are human rights and shall intensify its efforts to fulfill its duties under international and domestic laws to recognize, respect, protect, fulfill and promote all human rights and fundamental freedoms, including but not limited to those relating to health, economic, social, political, cultural, and other fields without distinction or discrimination on account of their class, age, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity and expression, language, ethnicity, religion, ideology, disability, education and status.

Women shall be recognized as full and equal partners of men in development and nation building and men and women shall share equally in all forms of productive and reproductive activities.

The City Government of Davao will actively contribute to the establishment of a national and international economic order based on sustained, equitable growth and balanced ecology. And that any development efforts it undertakes should enhance women's full potential, uplift their status and lead to the improvement of their quality of lives, their families and that of their communities.

The City Government of Davao values the dignity of women and children and guarantees full respect for human rights. The City also recognizes the need to protect the family and its members particularly women and children, from violence and threats to their personal safety and security.

Towards this end, the City Government of Davao shall pursue and implement vigorously gender responsive development policies, design an integrated gender and development support systems, taking into consideration women's immediate economic survival with support for their efforts of empowerment and self-determination, and to adopt and implement measures to protect and promote their rights.

TO ATTAIN THE FORGOING POLICY:
1. Subject to applicable laws, rules, and regulations, thirty percent (50%) of the Office Development Assistance Funds received from foreign governments and multilateral organizations shall be allocated to the Department of Women Affairs in accordance with the provisions of Republic Act 7192, otherwise known as "Women in Development and Nation Building Act", by the City Government departments and agencies concerned, to support programs and activities for women.

--- [Page 3] ---
Page 3 of 45
Ord. No. 0333-20
2. All City Government departments and agencies shall ensure that women benefit equally and participate directly in the development programs and projects of said departments and agencies, specifically those funded under official foreign development assistance, to ensure the full participation and involvement of women in the development process, pursuant to RA 7192.
3. All government project proposals shall ascertain the inclusion of gender responsive indicators and guidelines while not to be removed in locating the root of women's oppression, pursuant to the United Nations Declarations and Conventions of which the Philippine Government is a signatory, including especially the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW).
4. All City Government departments and agencies of Davao City upon effectiveness of this Code shall review and revise all their regulations, circulars, issuances and procedures to remove gender biases therein.
5. The Barangay Council of Women of Davao City, as provided for under Section 12, Article II, Chapter II, Book I of this Code, shall be actively consulted in matters dealing with official development assistance or foreign aid so as to determine gender biases and implications on women.
SECTION 3. DEFINITION OF TERMS
a.) Battering - a series of physical, economic and psychological abuse. It is a repeated and habitual cyclic pattern or means of intimidation and imposition of the batterer's will and control over the survivor's life. Battering constitutes the following kinds of behavior but not limited to:
I. Physical battering - a kind of battering that refers to acts that include bodily or physical harm;
II. Sexual battering - this includes physical attacks on the woman's breast/teats or forced sexual activity accompanied by either physical violence or the threat of physical violence.
III. Psychological battering - this includes threats of suicide, violence against the woman or her family, punching, breaking or defacing or otherwise destroying the house or any part thereof or the personal belongings of a woman, threatening to have the other taken away, threatening to take them to a foreign country and forcing the victim to do degrading things; controlling the victim's lawful or usual activities, the use of foul and insulting words or statements and threats of abandonment and expulsion such as forcing the wives to leave the conjugal dwelling. This provision shall likewise apply to common-law relations but does not include adultery ones as contemplated in the Revised Penal Code.
IV. Economic battering - this includes deprivation of women of economic resources, their generation and mobilization so as to create dependency and submissiveness to men and to any established structures of domination.

--- [Page 4] ---
Page 4 of 45

Ord. No. 0333-20

b.) Discrimination - refers to any act or conduct which withholds, excludes, restricts, curtails, demeans human dignity, or otherwise impairs the recognition, enjoyment, and exercise of human rights and basic freedom in the economic, labor, social, cultural, educational and any other field of public life based on sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, race, color, descent, national or ethnic origin, religious affiliations or beliefs.

c.) Children - refers to those who are below eighteen (18) years of age or over but are unable to fully take care of themselves or protect themselves from abuse, neglect, cruelty, exploitation, or discrimination because of physical or mental disability or condition.

d.) Commodification of Women - refers to a practice which puts women in subordinate situations which results in the treatment of women as both consumer goods and objects. As consumers, women are allured to buy beauty products to enhance their physical attractiveness. As objects of consumption, women are reduced to a sexual commodity for manipulation and utilization for one's sexual desire or interest usually in exchange of money or goods so that women have no control or power to reject such utilization or manipulation.

e.) Creation of the Integrated Gender and Development Office (IGDO) - refers to the Office which shall be created by the City Government of Davao, through a separate ordinance, and is responsible for the implementation of this Ordinance. It addresses itself to the convergence of the local government efforts towards a district level coordination and cooperation in facilitating gender and development program planning, development, implementation, monitoring and evaluation.

f.) Cybercrime - any act which refers to cybersex, cyberpornography, and any unlawful acts that can be gathered online as contemplated in Republic Act No. 1075 or the Cybercrime Prevention Act of 2012.

g.) Development - refers to the improvement of the quality of life of all regardless of age, sex, gender, tribe, race, creed and religion. It is characterized by an enrichment of Filipino indigenous resources, sustainable utilization of the natural resources of the country and freedom from dependency. It is therefore, sustained, equitable growth and balanced ecology.

h.) Differently-abled Women - refer to women survivors of physical impairments and have differential needs and potentials.

i.) Discrimination Against Women - refers to any gender-based distinction, exclusion, or restriction which has the effect or purpose of impairing or nullifying the recognition, enjoyment, or exercise by women, irrespective of their marital status, on the basis of equality of men and women, of human rights and fundamental freedom in the political, economic, social, cultural, civil, or any other field.

It includes any act or omission, including by law, policy, administrative measure, or practice, that directly or indirectly excludes or restricts women in the recognition and promotion of their rights and their access to and enjoyment of opportunities, benefits, or privileges.

--- [Page 5] ---
Page 5 of 45
Ord. No. 0333-20

j. Entertainment Industry - includes establishments identified as places of amusement as defined in the Local Tax Code of Davao City, Ordinance No. Series of 1991.

k. Fund Raising Initiative - refers to any activity, whether in whole or in part, but not limited to, those integrated in any raffle, draw, entertainment shows, fiestas, car shows, benefit or disco dance, premier showing of movies, fashion shows, modeling, or any similar fund-raising undertakings where women are used as donor prize, substitute for prizes won, a companion package for an award, prize or recognition, or any manner, activity, come-on display, or exhibition which depicts a woman as central, partial, or special focus in order to raise funds.

I. GAD Focal Point System (GFPS) - refers to an interacting and interdependent group of people involving the local government instrumentalities of the City of Davao tasked to catalyze and accelerate gender mainstreaming. It is a mechanism established to ensure and advocate for, guide, coordinate, and monitor the development, implementation, review, and updating of their GAD plans and GAD-related programs and projects as illustrated by PCW Memorandum Circular No. 2011-01, Series of 2011.

m. Gender - is a socially constructed difference between men and women. Differences are created artificially, partly through socialization and partly through positive and negative discrimination in the various institutions and structures of society.

n. Gender and Development - refers to conscious effort at improving the quality of lives of women and men based on sustained, equitable growth, and balanced ecology. It sees society as a gender system in all its aspects economic, political, and social. It views women's oppression in both the private and public spheres. It sees women as agents of change, instead of mere recipients of development assistance. It calls for structural changes as well as reorientation of the patriarchal culture.

All schools, Offices, Establishments or Companies, Departments and Agencies of the Local Government of Davao City shall be provided with gender sensitivity orientation and training which will equip them with theoretical and practical knowledge on gender issues and concerns. Likewise, all establishments, schools, colleges and universities shall develop assessment tools for gender biases.

o. Gender Equality - refers to the principle asserting the equality of men and women and their right to enjoy equal conditions realizing their full human potentials to contribute to and benefit from the results of development and to achieve State recognition that all human beings are free and equal in dignity and rights.

--- [Page 6] ---
Page 6 of 45
Ord. No. 0333-20

p. Gender Equity - refers to the policies, instruments, programs, services, and actions that address the disadvantaged position of women in society by providing preferential treatment and affirmative action. Such temporary special measures aimed at accelerating de facto equality between men and women shall not be considered discriminatory, but shall in no way entail as a consequence the maintenance of unequal or separate standards. These measures shall be discontinued when the objectives of equality of opportunity and treatment have been achieved.

q. Gender Identity - refers to the personal sense of identity as characterized, among others, by manner of clothing, inclinations, and behavior in relation to masculine or feminine conventions.

r. Gender Mainstreaming - refers to the strategy for making women's as well as men's concerns and experiences an integral dimension of the design, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of policies and programs in all political, economic, and societal spheres so that women and men benefit equally and inequality is not perpetuated. It is the process of assessing the implications for women and men of any planned action, including legislation, policies, or programs in all areas and at all levels.

s. GDO - is an office in the Local Government Unit of Davao City, which shall act as the implementing, coordinating, regulatory, and monitoring body of the Local Government of Davao City to implement the provisions of the Ordinance relative to the gender-sensitive programs, projects, and activities of the departmental and institutional units in the City Government of Davao. It shall complete gender-related functions of other agencies of the local government. The said office shall be created through a separate ordinance to be enacted by the City Council of Davao.

t. Indigenous Peoples - refers to a group of people or homogeneous societies identified by self-identification and ascription by others who have continuously lived as organized communities on communally bounded and defined territories and who have retained claims of ownership since time immemorial, occupied, possessed, customs, tradition, and other distinctive cultural traits, or who have, through resistance to political, social, and cultural invasions of colonization, non-indigenous religions and culture, become historically differentiated from the majority of Filipinos. They shall likewise include peoples who are regarded as indigenous on account of their descent from the populations which inhabited the country, at the time of conquest or colonization, or at the time of invasions of non-indigenous religions and cultures, or the establishment of present state boundaries, who retain some or all of their own social, economic, cultural, and political institutions, or who may have resettled outside their ancestral domains or who may have resettled outside their ancestral domains as defined under Section 3 (h). Chapter II of Republic Act No. 8371, otherwise known as "The Indigenous Peoples Rights Act of 1997".

u. Land-based Projects - refer to activities designed systematically in order to provide women the opportunity to have full access and control over the maximum utilization of land and other indigenous resources.

--- [Page 7] ---
Page 7 of 45
Ord. No. 0333-20

v. Mail-Order Bride: It is a practice where a male foreign national establishes personal relations with a woman via mail or similar means upon recruitment by an individual or agency for the purpose of exploiting women in the guise of marriage.

w. Marital Status: As referred to by PSA Board Resolution No. 01, Series of 2017-99, is the status of an individual in relation to marriage, classified as follows:
a) Single - A person who has never been married;
b) Married - A couple living together as husband and wife, legally or consensually;
c) Divorced - A person whose bond of matrimony has been dissolved legally and who therefore can remarry;
d) Separated - A person separated legally or not from his/her spouse because of marital discord or misunderstanding;
e) Widowed - A person whose bond of matrimony has been dissolved by death of his/her spouse.

x. Military purposes/necessity - means the necessity of employing measures which are indispensable to achieve a legitimate aim of the conflict and are not otherwise prohibited by International Humanitarian Law.

y. Hero - refers to native peoples who have historically inhabited Mindanao, Palawan, and Sulu, and who are largely of the Islamic faith.

z. Other Places of Amusement - include all other places of amusement not specifically enumerated or otherwise provided for in this Ordinance, including, but not limited to, nightclubs or dayclubs, cocktail lounges, super or family clubs, disco houses, minus-one or sing-along houses, bar or beer houses, cabarets, theaters, cinemas, theaters, movie houses, bowling alleys, movie houses, beach resorts, and other places of amusement where one seeks admission to entertain himself whether by seeing or viewing or by direct participation.

aa. Pedophilia - is a form of perversion where children are the preferred victims, defined under the following circumstances:
a. when the offender shall have sexual intercourse with a young girl or girl child;
b. when the offender shall have anal or oral intercourse with a boy child or girl child; and
c. any sexual abuse, rape, cybersex, cyberpornography, or any other forms of abuse committed to minors as provided by the Revised Penal Code and Republic Act No. 9208, Republic Act No. 7610, Republic Act No. 9775, and Republic Act No. 10175.

bb. Persons with Disabilities - refer to those who are suffering from restriction or different abilities as a result of mental, physical, or sensory impairment to perform an activity in the manner or within the range considered normal for a human being.

--- [Page 8] ---
Page 8 of 45
Ord. No. 0333-20

cc. Pornographic and Indecent Shows – refer to indecent shows as used in this Code which include nude or other provocative gestures which further project and exhibit women as sex objects.

Any person or agency who engages in shows depicting women as sex objects in private or in public place or under scandalous circumstances shall be deemed to have violated women's rights.

dd. Psychological Program – refers to an intervention using a system approach to conditions of women as it views women’s differentiated needs in a social context.

ee. Reproductive Health – refers to the state of complete physical, mental and social well-being and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity, in all matters relating to the reproductive system and to its functions and processes. This implies that people are able to have a responsible, safe, consensual and satisfying sex life, that they have the capability to reproduce and the freedom to decide if, when, and how often to do so. This further implies that women and men attain equal relationships in matters related to sexual relations and reproduction.

ff. Reproductive Health Care – refers to the access to a full range of methods, facilities, services and supplies that contribute to reproductive health and well-being by addressing reproductive health-related problems. It also includes sexual health, the purpose of which is the enhancement of life and personal relations. The elements of reproductive health care include the following:

1. Family planning information and services which shall include as a first priority making women of reproductive age fully aware of their respective cycles to make them aware of when fertilization is highly probable, as well as highly improbable;

2. Maternal, infant and child health and nutrition, including breastfeeding;

3. Prescription of abortion and management of abortion complications;

4. Adolescent and youth reproductive health guidance and counseling;

5. Prevention, treatment and management of reproductive tract infections (RTIs), HIV and AIDS and other Sexually Transmitted Infections (STIs);

6. Elimination of violence against women and children and other forms of sexual and gender-based violence;

7. Education and counseling on sexuality and reproductive health;

8. Treatment of breast and reproductive tract cancers and other gynecological conditions and disorders;

9. Male responsibility and involvement and men's reproductive health;

--- [Page 9] ---
10. Prevention, treatment and management of infertility and sexual dysfunction;
11. Reproductive health education for the adolescents; and
12. Mental health aspect of reproductive health care.

gg. Right to Information - refers to equal access to information regarding policies on women, including programs, projects, and funding outlays that affect women, shall be ensured.

hh. Rights of Women - are the rights of women that are defined and declared by the United Nations under the Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) and Republic Act No. 971 (which hereinafter referred to as CEDAW), which are as follows:

a. Women have the right to the prevention and protection from all forms of violence and coercion against their person, their freedom, their sexuality, and their individuality;

b. Women have the right to freely and fully participate individually or collectively in the political processes of their communities and nations;

c. Women have the right to the means for assuring their economic welfare and security;

d. Women have the right to the necessary knowledge and means for the full exercise of their reproductive choice in accordance to the Constitution and their beliefs and preferences;

e. Women have the right to choose a spouse in accordance with their values and preferences, maintain equality in marriage or its dissolution, and obtain adequate support for rearing and caring of their children;

f. Women have the right to an adequate, relevant and gender-fair education throughout their lives, from childhood to adulthood;

g. Women have the right to adequate nutrition and proper health care;

h. Women have the right to humane living conditions;

i. Women have the right to nurture their personhood, collectively and individually, to secure an image of themselves as whole and valuable human beings, to build relationships based on respect, trust and mutuality;

j. Women have the right to equality before the law in principle as well as in practice;

k. Other rights of women as protected by International Conventions and Domestic Laws.

ii. Senior Citizens - refer to those sixty (60) years of age and above;

jj. Sexual Abuse - Sexual abuse shall include, but is not limited to, the following:

1. When a man inserts or attempts to insert his penis into the mouth or anus of a woman under any of the following situations:

--- [Page 10] ---
Page 10 of 45
Ord. No. 0333-20

a. Through force, threat or intimidation;
b. By means of abuse of authority or relationship;
c. When the offended party is deprived of reason or is otherwise incapable;
d. When the offended party is below twelve (12) years old, even though none of the above circumstances is present.

2. When a person who inserts part of his or her body other than the sexual organ, or who introduces any object or instrument into the genital or anus of a woman under any of the situations stated in paragraph 1.

3. When a person subjects another to have sexual intercourse with an animal under any of the circumstances stated in paragraph 1 or through any abnormal, unusual or inhumane sexual act.

4. Any intentional contact, however slight of one's penis to the genital, mouth, breast or anus of a woman or intentional contact thereof, however slight, to any part of her body other than her sexual organ; or the use of any instrument or object which intentionally touches the genital, breast or anus of a woman.

5. Sexual abuse in intimate marital relations. Forced sexual act committed under intimate marital relations shall form part of sexual abuse such as those between man and woman, woman and woman, man and man relations, married or unmarried, legally separated or separated in fact.

kk. Sexual Orientation refers to the direction of emotional, sexual attraction, or conduct towards people of the same sex or towards people of both sexes, or towards people of opposite sex, or the absence of sexual attraction.

II. Sexual Harassment: Sexual harassment is committed through any unwanted, unsolicited, unwelcomed actions of a sexual nature or remarks referring to a person's sex, gender, or sexuality, regardless of the motive for committing such action or remarks, provided further that, the positions, hierarchy and stature of the perpetrator and victim shall not matter in considering the act as gender-based sexual harassment. Sexual harassment shall be unlawful in the employment, education or training environment as prescribed in Republic Act No. 7877. Sexual harassment shall also be unlawful in streets, public spaces, and/or online as provided by Republic Act No. 11113.

mm. Survivor's Support Group - is an organized group of women to whom a woman-survivor of violence voluntarily agrees to establish a professional helping process.

nn. Trafficking in Women - is a covert recruitment of women into the sex trade industry. It includes new forms of sexual exploitation such as sex tourism, recruitment of domestic workers from developing countries, and organized marriages between women from various world countries, and foreign nationals, promoting or initiating a system in which women become movable properties and objects of exchange. Trafficking in Women shall include the following but not limited to:

--- [Page 11] ---
Page 11 of 45
Ord. No. 0333-20
a. for any person, association, cult, religion or organization, or similar entities to commit the following acts:
- establish or carry on a business for the purpose of matching women for marriage to foreigners either on mail-order basis or through personal introduction or cyberspace;
- advertise, publish, print or distribute, or cause the advertisement, publication, printing or distribution of any brochure, flyer or propaganda material calculated to promote the above-mentioned prohibited acts for profit or advantage;
- solicit, enlist, or attract/induce any woman to join any club association or organization whose objective is to match women for marriage to foreigners;
- either on mail-order basis or through personal introduction or cyberspace or other forms which facilitate the act of solicitation;
- use the postal service, cyberspace or satellite TV to promote the above-mentioned prohibited acts.
b. to buy or sell a woman, or any of her body parts for profit; or to use her body by any pretext to be used as experiments, research or the like without her consent.
c. to act as a procurer of sex worker.
d. to threaten or use violence and force a woman to become a mail-order bride.
o.o.ViolenceAgainstWomen refers to any act of gender-based violence that results in, is likely to result in physical, sexual or psychological harm or suffering to women, including threats of such act, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in public or private life.
pp. Women refers to biologically assigned female at birth.
CHAPTER II - DEVELOPMENT CONCERNS
ARTICLE I
Violence Against Women and Their Children
SECTION 1. ACTS OF VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN AND THEIR CHILDREN. Violence against women and their children shall be committed through any of the following acts:
a. Causing physical harm to the woman or her child;
b. Threatening to cause the woman or her child physical harm;
c. Attempting to cause the woman or her child physical harm;
d. Placing the woman or her child in fear of imminent physical harm;

--- [Page 12] ---
Page 12 of 45
Ord. No. 0333-20
e. Attempting to compel or compelling the woman or her child to engage in conduct which the woman or her child has the right to desist from or to desist from conduct which the woman or her child has the right to engage in, or attempting to restrict or restricting the woman's or her child's freedom of movement or conduct by force or threat of force, physical or other harm or threat of physical or other harm, or intimidation directed against the woman or her child. This shall include, but not limited to, the following acts committed with the purpose or effect of controlling or restricting the woman's or her child's movement or conduct:
i. Threatening to deprive or actually depriving the woman or her child of custody or access to her/his family;
ii. Depriving or threatening to deprive the woman or her children of financial support legally due her or her family, or deliberately providing the woman's children insufficient financial support;
iii. Depriving or threatening to deprive the woman or her child of a legal right;
iv. Preventing the woman in engaging in any legitimate profession, occupation, business or activity, or controlling the victim's own money or properties, or solely controlling the conjugal or common money, or properties;
f. Inflicting or threatening to inflict physical harm on oneself for the purpose of controlling her actions or decisions;
g. Causing or attempting to cause the woman or her child to engage in any sexual activity which does not constitute rape, by force or threat of force, physical harm, or through intimidation directed against the woman or her child or her/his immediate family;
h. Engaging in purposeful, knowing, or reckless conduct, personally or through another that alarms or causes substantial emotional or psychological distress to the woman or her child. This shall include, but not be limited to, the following acts:
i. Stalking or following the woman or her child in public or private places;
ii. Peering in the window or lingering outside the residence of the woman or her child;

--- [Page 13] ---
Page 13 of 45
Ord. No. 0333-20

iii. Entering or remaining in the dwelling or on the property of the woman or her child against her/his will;
iv. Destroying the property and personal belongings or inflicting harm to animals or pets of the woman or her child; and
v. Engaging in any form of harassment or violence;
i. Causing mental or emotional anguish, public ridicule or humiliation to the woman or her child, including, but not limited to, repeated verbal and emotional abuse, and denial of financial support or custody of minor children or denial of access to the woman's child/children.

SECTION 2. BARANGAY VAW DESK ESTABLISHMENT AND OPERATION Pursuant to RA 9710, the barangay shall establish a Violence Against Women (VAW) Desk with operating expenses chargeable to its GAP allocation, to ensure that violence against women cases are fully addressed in a gender-responsive manner. Guidelines set for the establishment of VAW Desk under DILG, SWSD, and DOJ IIMC 2010-1 and Davao City's VAW Desk Ordinance shall be followed by the barangay.

SECTION 3. DUTIES OF OTHER GOVERNMENT AGENCIES AND LGUs Other government agencies and LGUs shall establish programs such as, but not limited to, education and information campaigns and seminars or symposia on the nature, causes, incidence, and consequences of such violence particularly towards educating the public on its social impacts.

SECTION 4. WOMEN'S RIGHTS DURING ARMED CONFLICT AND MILITARIZATION Pursuant to RA 9710, women shall have the right to protection and security in situations of armed conflict and militarization. Towards this end, they shall be protected from all forms of gender-based violence, particularly rape and other forms of sexual abuse, and all forms of violence in situations of armed conflict. The city shall observe international standards for the protection of civilian population in circumstances of emergency and armed conflict. It shall not force women, especially indigenous people, to abandon their lands, territories, and means of subsistence, or relocate them in special centers for military purposes under any discriminatory condition.

SECTION 5. MANDATORY HUMAN RIGHTS AND GENDER SENSITIVITY TRAININGS FOR OFFICIALS AND FUNCTIONARIES All city and barangay officials and functionaries/personnel, especially those involved in the protection and defense of women against gender-based violence, shall undergo a mandatory training on human rights and gender sensitivity led by the Integrated Gender and Development Division (IGDD) and its accredited service providers and/or training institutions.

--- [Page 14] ---
**Page 14 of 45**

**Ord. No. 0333-20**

**SECTION 6. WOMEN AFFECTED BY DISASTERS, CALAMITIES, AND OTHER CRISIS SITUATIONS.** Pursuant to RA 9710, women have the right to protection and security in times of disasters, calamities, and other crisis situations especially in all phases of relief, recovery, rehabilitation, and construction efforts. The city shall provide for immediate humanitarian assistance, allocation of resources, and early resettlement, if necessary. It shall also address the particular needs of women from a gender perspective to ensure their full protection from sexual exploitation and other sexual and gender-based violence committed against them. Responses to disaster situations shall include the provision of services such as psychosocial support, livelihood support, education, psychological health, and comprehensive health services, including protection during pregnancy.

**SECTION 7. PROHIBITION OF PRINTING, PUBLISHING, DISPLAY AND DISTRIBUTION OF PORNOGRAPHIC SCENES ON MOVIE/TV TRAILERS/SHOWS, POSTERS, BILLBOARDS, AND OTHER MATERIALS AND SIMILAR LITERATURE.** It shall be unlawful for any person to print, publish, display, or distribute pornographic scenes on movie/TV trailer/show, poster, billboard, literature, broadcast on radio stations, posting on social media or any cyber space, and other visual material which treat women as sex objects and commodities.

**SECTION 8. COMPREHENSIVE SUPPORT TO WOMEN-SURVIVORS OF VIOLENCE.** The City Government of Davao, through the appropriate government offices, will provide a comprehensive support to women-survivors of violence which consist of, but not limited to, the following:

a) Immediately conduct an investigation within 24 hours;

b) Provide for counseling and medical services for the offended party;

c) Gather evidence for the arrest and prosecution of the offenders;

d) Make a report of his/her investigation and, on the basis of the offended party's testimony and additional evidence, if any, endorse the same to the proper prosecution office within 36 hours from the time of filing, regardless of his/her existing cases;

e) The investigation officer or the examining physician, if possible, of the same sex as the offended party, ensures that only persons expressly authorized by the latter are allowed inside the room where the investigation or medical or physical examination is being conducted.

--- [Page 15] ---
Page 15 of 45
Ord. No. 0333-20
f) Women victims survivors of all forms of violence shall be registered in a community-based psychological program that shall assist the women in holistically rebuilding and empowering themselves;
g) All investigations/hearings involving rape cases and other forms of violence against women conducted in police stations, prosecutor's office and trial courts shall recognize the survivor's social support group as expressly allowed or requested by the offended party;
h) A temporary shelter with appropriate support service for the women in crisis under the management and supervision of the City Social Welfare and Development Office (CSWDO).
Victims of Violence Against Women and Their Children including sexual abuse and/or other forms of abuse shall be provided Free Legal Services by the City Government of Davao through the Office of Special Counsel on VAWC (QSC- VAWC) of the IGDP.
SECTION 9. PROSTITUTION AS A VIOLATION OF WOMEN'S RIGHTS. Prostitution shall be recognized as a violation of human rights and exploitation of women who have no real choices for survival. Rescue and intervention shall be made available.
The City Government of Davao shall provide socio-economic support services for the women in prostitution both establishment based and non-establishment based consistent in its desire to concretely respond to their practical needs.
SECTION 10. LOCAL MONITORING BOARD FOR VIOLENCE IN MEDIA. A Local Monitoring Board for movie, print, broadcast, and multi-media, shall be setup to classify, censure, prohibit or regulate the exhibition of materials degrading women. The Board's function shall also extend to video shops, electronic communication, cable television, books and other forms of audio visual channels or instruments.
SECTION 11. Creation of Women and Children Protection Desk (WCPD) and Appointment of WCPD Officer. The City Government of Davao shall create the WCPD and appoint WCPD Officer in all police stations in Davao City to specifically handle concerns on women and children.
SECTION 12. ROLE OF FEMALE POLICE OFFICER. Complaints filed by women on battering and other forms of abuse and/or violence against them shall be handled by female officers in the local police force who shall undergo special course on handling cases affecting abused women.

--- [Page 16] ---
Page 16 of 45
Ord. No. 0333-20

SECTION 13. CREATION OF PSYCHOSOCIAL TEAMS. There shall be created a psychosocial team under the supervision of the City Social Welfare and Development Office (CSWDO), equipped with capacities and skills to provide the appropriate psychosocial intervention for women and children survivors of violence as well as to the perpetrators. The team shall be composed of the following at the minimum:
1. Social Workers
2. Psychologists
3. Psychiatric Nurses.

An all-male Psychosocial team shall also be created in order to address the appropriate psychosocial intervention should the perpetrator be male. The intervention may include, among others, anger management.

SECTION 14. ACTS OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT. The act of sexual harassment may be committed by:
a. Catcalling, wolf-whistling, unwanted invitations, misogynistic, transphobic, homophobic, and sexist slurs;
b. Persistent unwitted comments or gestures on a person's appearance;
c. Relentless requests for personal details;
d. Statement of sexual comments and suggestions;
e. Public masturbation or flashing of private parts, groping, making offensive body gestures at someone, and other similar level sexual actions;
f. Any advances, whether verbal or physical, that is unwanted and has threatened one's sense of personal space and physical safety. This may include cursing, leering and intrusive gazing, and taunting;
g. Persistent telling of sexual jokes, use of sexual names; and
h. Stalking.

It may also be committed through online spaces using information and communications technology by harassing, intimidating or threatening the victim through:
h.1 Physical, psychological, and emotional threats, unwanted sexual misogynistic, transphobic, homophobic and sexist remarks and comments online whether publicly or through direct and private messages;
h.2 Invasion of the victim's privacy through cyberstalking and incessant messaging;

--- [Page 17] ---
Page 17 of 45
Ord. No. 0333-20
h.3 Uploading and sharing without the consent of the victim any form of media that contains photos, voice, or video with sexual content;
h.4 Any unauthorized recording and sharing of any information online;
h.5 Impersonating identities of victims online or posting lies about victims to harm their reputation; or
h.6 Filing false abuse reports to online platforms to silence victims.

In workplaces, educational and training institutions, gender-based sexual harassment may be committed through an act or series of acts involving any unwelcome sexual advances, requests, propositions, or other verbal, written, physical, or any act of sexual nature, whether done verbally, physically, or electronically, or through the use of technology such as text messaging or electronic mail or through any other forms of information and communication systems that create a hostile environment affecting an individual's employment, education, training, job performance and/or opportunities, regardless of whether the sexual advances, requests or demands for sexual favors are accepted or not.

Other Forms of Sexual Harassment. Pursuant to the definition provided by RA 7877 and RA 11313, the following constitute other forms of sexual harassment, some of which are covered by the Revised Penal Code under Acts of Lucidness:
1. Persistent telling of offensive jokes such as green jokes or other analogous statements to someone who finds them offensive or humiliating;
2. Taunting a person with constant talk about sex and sexual innuendos;
3. Displaying offensive or lewd pictures and publications in the workplace;
4. Intentionally making comments about sexual activities or private life during interviews for employment, scholarship grant or any lawful activity applied for;
5. Making offensive hand and body gestures at someone;
6. Requesting dates despite verbal rejection;
7. Touching, pinching or brushing up someone's body unnecessarily or deliberately;
8. Using or Embracing someone against her will;
9. Requesting sexual favors in exchange for good grade, obtaining a good job or promotion, etc.;

--- [Page 18] ---
Page 18 of 45
Ord. No. 0333-20
11. cursing, whistling or calling a woman in public with words having dirty connotations or implications which tend to ridicule, humiliate or embarrass the woman such as "outa", "boring", "peste", and other similar terms;
12. any other unnecessary acts during physical examinations;
13. forcing women to wear suggestive or provocative attire during interviews such as job hiring, promotion, admission.
SECTION 15. ACTS RESULTING TO CYBERCRIME - It shall be unlawful and unpunishable for any person to engage with, influence or force a minor or a woman to engage into any Cybercrime acts.
ARTICLE II
Political and Public Sphere of Women
SECTION 1. Declaration of March 8 as International Women's Day. March 8 shall be declared as a Special Working Holiday for the City of Davao through an Executive Order issued by the City Mayor. There shall be a barangay-level set of activities on women and the law, current issues affecting and influencing women, and assessment of women's status in the City of Davao and other forms of critical consciousness-raising activities. On or about March 8 of every year, the Davao Women's Summit shall be organized.
SECTION 2. International Day of Action for Women's Health. The Local Government of Davao City shall cause the celebration of the International Day of Action for Women's Health on May 28 where issues and concerns relative to the protection and promotion of women's health shall be examined, deliberated, projected and government action sought.
SECTION 3. 18-DAY CAMPAIGN AGAINST VAWC - There shall be an annual 18-day campaign against VAWC to raise awareness among all stakeholders that VAWC is a public issue of national concern. Such campaign shall be conducted during November 25 to December 12 of every calendar year.
SECTION 4. BARANGAY LEVEL SELF-ORGANIZATION OF WOMEN. Self-Organization of women shall be recognized at the barangay level which must be sectoral/sector based to include young and elderly women which shall be assisted by the City Social Welfare and Development Office (CSWDO).
SECTION 5. Election of Women Sectoral Representative to the Sangguniang Panlungsod. Pursuant to RA No. 7160, or the Local Government Code of the Philippines, under Title II, Chapter I, Section 41 (c), there shall be one (1) sectoral representative from the women to the Sangguniang Panlungsod of Davao City as a concrete manifestation of women's place in local governance. Such election of women's sectoral representative shall be made during the Women's Summit in March of the election year.

--- [Page 19] ---
Page 19 of 45
Ord. No. 0333-20

SECTION 6. QUOTA REPRESENTATION OF WOMEN IN THE CITY COUNCIL OF DAVAO. The City Government of Davao is encouraged that at least forty percent (40%) of the members of the City Council are women.

SECTION 7. REPRESENTATION OF WOMEN IN BARANGAY DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL (BDC) STRUCTURE. The City Government of Davao must ensure that at least forty percent (40%) of the members of the BDC are women to strengthen government's recognition of women's potentials in each barangay.

SECTION 8. WOMEN REPRESENTATIVES TO THE CITY DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL (CDC). The City shall ensure that at least forty percent (40%) of the members of CDC are women as mentioned in Section 1(b) of Republic Act 9710, otherwise known as the Magna Carta of Women.

SECTION 9. PEACE BASED ON JUSTICE. The network of women NGOs and NGOs shall be formally consulted on peace and development issues on the basis of social equity and justice.

SECTION 10. WOMEN IN LAW ENFORCEMENT POSITIONS. All qualified women shall be given an opportunity to assume key law enforcement positions until fifty percent (50%) of the personnel from the Police Force shall be women in accordance with Section 9(a) of Republic Act 9710, otherwise known as the Magna Carta of Women.

SECTION 11. Legal Candidate Quota. All political parties participating in the local elections are encouraged that at least forty percent (40%) of their candidates are women.

SECTION 12. BARANGAY COUNCIL OF WOMEN. Every barangay in the City of Davao shall organize its Barangay Council of Women comprising of all the women residents of the barangay. BCW shall be the consultative body of TGD in all matters relevant to the periodic planning, implementation, monitoring, evaluation of the city's programs, projects and activities of, for and by women. The Federation of BCW from all barangays of Davao City shall convene every March of every year for the Women's Summit.

ARTICLE III Cultural Identity of Women

SECTION 1. INDIGENOUS AND MORO WOMEN OF DAVAO CITY. The preservation of the cultural identity of the Indigenous and Moro women shall be actively incorporated in all programs and projects of the Local Government of Davao City.

SECTION 2. CULTURALLY-APPROPRIATE SCHOOLS. There shall be accessible and culturally-appropriate schools for Indigenous and Moro peoples in Davao City.

--- [Page 20] ---
Page 20 of 45
Ord. No. 0333-20

SECTION 3. DECLARATION OF INDIGENOUS AND MORO POPULATIONS' AREAS: A survey of indigenous and Moro populations' areas in Davao City shall be undertaken within two years upon effectiveness of this Code which shall become the basis for the indigenous and Moro populations' areas.

SECTION 4. INTEGRATED DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM FOR INDIGENOUS AND MORO WOMEN: The City Government of Davao shall develop a program that shall facilitate empowerment of the indigenous and Moro women. Active support for the preservation of the indigenous women's knowledge of the environment shall be incorporated in the program.

ARTICLE IV Labor and Employment

SECTION 1. ORIENTATION ON SEXUAL HARASSMENT: All local offices, agencies, and establishments or companies, both public and private in Davao City shall conduct orientation on sexual harassment for their personnel, provided to them by competent IGDD staff or any of the IGDD accredited service providers. Certificate of compliance shall be submitted to the Integrated Gender and Development Division.

SECTION 2. SETTING UP OF COMMITTEE ON DECORUM AND INVESTIGATION (CODI): A Committee on Decorum and Investigation (CODI) shall be set up in all establishments and academic institutions pursuant to the provisions of RA 7877 and RA 11313 in the city to file complaints related to work-related, education-related or training-related sexual harassment, involving not only barangay officials, functionaries as well as other employees within the local government but also employers, teachers, trainees, managers, supervisors and the like in private establishments.

SECTION 3. EQUAL ACCESS TO JOB TRAINING AND PROMOTION: No woman shall be deprived of job training and promotion on account of her sex, gender identity and expression, ethnicity, color, creed, religion, sexual orientation, political affiliation, and civil status.

SECTION 4. GENDER SENSITIVE PHYSICAL FACILITIES: A physical facility appropriate for a gender sensitive environment shall be adopted by all offices, agencies and establishments or companies which shall help prevent sexual abuse and other forms of maltreatment in the workplace. It shall be encouraged to set up transparent doors, windows, dividers or any forms of partitions within the establishments.

SECTION 5. TAX INCENTIVES FOR BUSINESS ENTITIES: The City Government of Davao shall provide tax incentives to business entities: a) any amount used for the establishment, maintenance and operation of the child day care support system shall be tax deductible;

--- [Page 21] ---
Page 21 of 45
Ord. No. 0333-20
b) annual tax credit per child regularly served for at least one year in the Center;
c) annual tax credit per woman extended with maternity leave benefits for breastfeeding;
d) Annual tax credit per woman extended with VAWC leave benefits; and
e) Annual tax credit per woman extended with special leave benefit for women who suffered gynecological disorders.
SECTION 6. MONITORING SYSTEM FOR LABOR STANDARDS. A mechanism shall be installed in the Integrated Gender and Development Division to monitor the implementation of this Code and other relevant GAD Policies and other Labor Laws in coordination with the Department of Labor and Employment in all offices, agencies and establishments within Davao City.
SECTION 7. WOMEN PROTECTION DESK. There shall be an established Women Protection Desk with a Women Protection Desk Officer or its equivalent within the workplace, educational and training institutions in order to quickly respond to immediate complaints and reports regarding the violation of rights of the women therein.
ARTICLE V Health Right
SECTION 1. BUDGET FOR WOMEN'S HEALTH. A substantial portion of the health budget of the City Government shall be allocated for women's health and services, especially those in difficult circumstances.
SECTION 2. UPGRADED OF HEALTH CARE DELIVERY SYSTEM. Quality health care and services that are not discriminatory on account of their gender identity and expression, sexual orientation, age, sex, creed, religion and ethnicity shall be implemented in Davao City.
SECTION 3. FREE MEDICAL ROUTINE CHECK-UP. Women in the entertainment industry shall be afforded with free medical routine check-up and medicines in need.
SECTION 4. REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH CARE DELIVERY. The City of Davao shall adopt the reproductive health care approach at all levels of health care delivery. Such approach integrates many issues not previously considered central to population: sexuality, reproductive tract infection, gender power relations and domestic violence, and shall not be limited, to family planning and child bearing.

--- [Page 22] ---
Page 22 of 45
Ord. No. 0333-20

SECTION 5. WOMEN'S CONTROL OVER THEIR BODIES. Women's decisions regarding pregnancy shall be given appropriate support and guidance by all health professionals, private and public, at very minimal cost.

SECTION 6. GENDER-SENSITIVE CRISIS INTERVENTION UNIT. The City Government of Davao shall cause the establishment of a Gender-Sensitive Crisis Intervention Unit at all levels of the health care, primary, secondary and tertiary and shall provide service training to all health and other allied personnel who shall be assigned in this unit.

SECTION 7. GENDER-FAIR APPROACH TO PREMARITAL ORIENTATION AND COUNSELING PROGRAM. Without prejudice to Section 10, Art. IV of the Davao City Children's Welfare Code, regular reviewing and redesigning, when appropriate, of the Premarital Counseling Program of the City Government of Davao shall be jointly undertaken by the Integrated Gender and Development Division, City Health Office and the Davao City Special Office on Children's Concerns, City Social Welfare and Development Office and other concerned agencies. Agencies involved shall adhere to the principle of gender-fair premarital counseling service.

SECTION 8. STRENGTHENING PRIMARY HEALTH CARE DELIVERY. Inconsonance with the Department of Health's thrust and Sec.3, Art. IV of the Davao City Children's Welfare Code, the Local Government of Davao City shall strengthen the Primary Health Care Delivery in the context of reproductive health.

SECTION 9. WOMEN'S RIGHT TO HEALTH. Women are entitled to be given access to a comprehensive health care services and information.

(A) Comprehensive Health Services. The City of Davao shall, at all times, provide for a comprehensive, culture sensitive, and gender-responsive health services and programs covering all stages of a woman's life cycle and which addresses the major causes of women's mortality and morbidity. Provided, That in the provision for comprehensive health services, due respect shall be accorded to women's cultural convictions, the rights of the spouses to found a family, in accordance with their cultural convictions, and the elements of responsible parenthood, and the right of women to protection from hazardous drugs, devices, interventions, and substances.

Access to the following services shall be ensured:

1. Maternal care to include pre and postnatal services to address pregnancy and infant health and nutrition;

2. Hold a birthing home and/or lying-in clinic providing maternity services on prenatal and postnatal care, normal spontaneous delivery and care for the newborn;

--- [Page 23] ---
Page 23 of 45
Ord. No. 0333-20

3. Promotion of breastfeeding;
4. Responsible, ethical, legal, safe, and effective methods of family planning;
5. Facilitate collaboration in youth sexuality education and health services without prejudice to the primary right and duty of parents to educate their children;
6. Provide education and information on human sexuality and responsible parenthood in schools, workplaces, and communities;
7. Prevention and management of reproductive tract infections, including sexually transmitted diseases, HIV, and AIDS;
8. Prevention and management of reproductive tract cancers like breast and cervical cancers, and other gynecological conditions and disorders;
9. Prevention of abortion and management of pregnancy-related complications;
10. In cases of violence against women and children, women and children victims and survivors shall be provided/assisted to appropriate agencies giving comprehensive health services that include psychosocial, therapeutic, medical, and legal interventions and assistance towards healing, recovery, and empowerment;
11. Prevention and management of infertility and sexual dysfunction pursuant to ethical norms and medical standards;
12. Care of the elderly women beyond their child-bearing years;
13. Management, treatment, and intervention of mental health problems of women and girls;
14. Healthy lifestyle activities are encouraged and promoted through programs and projects as strategies in the prevention of diseases;
15. Provide reproductive health and rights education;
16. Develop and implement specific services that promote male involvement, participation, and responsibility in reproductive health as well as other reproductive health concerns of women; and
17. Provide information and services addressing the reproductive health needs of the marginalized, older persons, women in prostitution, the differently-abled persons, and women in war crisis situations.

(B) Comprehensive Health Information and Education:
The city shall provide women in all sectors with appropriate, timely, complete, and accurate information and education of all the above-stated aspects of women's health in government education and training programs, with due regard to the following:

--- [Page 24] ---
Page 24 of 45
Ord. No. 0333-20

1) The natural and primary right and duty of parents in the rearing of the youth and the development of moral character and the right of children to be brought up in an atmosphere of morality and technique for the enrichment and strengthening of character.
2) The formation of a person's sexuality that affirms human dignity;
and
3) Ethical, legal, safe, and effective family planning methods including fertility awareness.

ARTICLE VI
Education Right

SECTION 1. EDUCATION FOR WOMEN. Sunday classes for women shall be held in all barangay high schools in Davao City to facilitate working women's access to education.

All women desiring to engage themselves in functional and practical education shall be enlisted in adult education program, which shall be setup in all barangays in Davao City.

SECTION 2. PROMOTION OF GENDER-SENSITIVE CURRICULUM. The schools in Davao City shall actively promote gender-sensitive professional school counseling and career education programs to encourage females to pursue academic and technical courses in order to widen their future career opportunities.

The schools in Davao city shall also promote Gender mainstreaming to prevent discrimination, to address both males and females' concerns, and assure their participation in schools pursuant to CHED Memorandum Order No. 1, Series of 2015.

SECTION 3. MONITORING AND REPORTING OF STEREOTYPED PORTRAYAL OF ROLES OF WOMEN AND MEN IN EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS. The Integrated Gender and Development Division shall coordinate closely with the City Division of Schools, Davao Association of Colleges and Schools and other network of schools in monitoring and reporting of stereotyped portrayal of roles of women and men as projected in education materials.

SECTION 4. GAD ELECTIVE COURSE. A Gender and Development Elective Course shall be developed, formulated, implemented and carried out in the City College of Davao.

ARTICLE VII
Socio-Economic Benefits for Women

SECTION 1. RIGHT TO LIVELIHOOD CREDIT, CAPITAL, AND TECHNOLOGY. - The City Government of Davao shall ensure that women are provided with the following:

--- [Page 25] ---
Page 25 of 45
Ord. No. 0333-20
a) Equal access to formal sources of credit and capital;
b) Equal share to the produce of farms and aquatic resources; and
c) Employment opportunities for returning women migrant workers taking into account their skills and qualifications. Corollarily, the city shall also promote skills and entrepreneurship development of returning women migrant workers.
SECTION 2. ACCESS TO SAFE WATER - All barangays in Davao City shall provide easy access to safe water supply. Appropriate systems shall be installed to ease women's workload.
SECTION 3. MAGNESOSYO TA DAY: Qualified women shall be given access to the Magnesosyo Ta Day Program ensuring that they are given livelihood opportunities through start-up grants for their innovative businesses.
ARTICLE VIII Rural Women's Rights
SECTION 1. LAND FOR WOMEN-HEADED HOUSEHOLDS AND LANDLESS FAMILIES. Idle lands shall be distributed to qualified women-headed households and landless families interested and committed to till the land upon issuance of a Memorandum of Agreement between the parties concerned. Ownership of such land shall be granted to women-headed households and landless families after ten years of continuous tillage. Support services shall be delivered by the Local Government of Davao City as part of the Memorandum of Agreement.
SECTION 2. ACCESS TO SCIENCE AND WOMEN-FRIENDLY ALTERNATIVE TECHNOLOGY EDUCATION. The City Agriculturist's Office of Davao City in conjunction with the Department of Science and Technology and other related line agencies should establish a science and women-friendly alternative technology center for rural women in each barangay.
SECTION 3. PROMOTION OF LAND-BASED PROJECTS. The City Government of Davao shall promote and support land-based project sensing food security for rural women utilizing science, women-friendly and appropriate technology instilling collectivism.
ARTICLE IX Special Sectoral Concerns
SECTION 1. ADVOCACY ON DIFFERENTLY-ABLED WOMEN'S RIGHTS. Active advocacy on the rights of differently-abled women shall be conducted by the Integrated Gender and Development Division in coordination with the City Social Welfare and Development Office (CSWDO) - Persons with Disability Affairs Office (PDAC) and other agencies that advocate on women.

--- [Page 26] ---
Page 26 of 45
Ord. No. 0333-20

There shall be a special education school for differently-
abled women in Davao City which shall offer appropriate
technology curricula.

SECTION 2. INNOVATIVE EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITIES FOR
DIFFERENTLY-ABLED WOMEN. The City Government of Davao shall develop
innovative or appropriate employment opportunities for differently-abled women
recognizing their differentiated conditions and full potentials as human persons.

SECTION 3. REPORTING OF CASES OF HARASSMENT COMMITTED
AGAINST DIFFERENTLY-ABLED WOMEN. The City Government of Davao through its Integrated Gender and Development Division shall require all barangays to monitor and report cases of harassment and other forms of violence
committed against differently-abled women.

SECTION 4. PARTICIPATION OR REPRESENTATION OF
DIFFERENTLY-ABLED AND ELDERLY WOMEN. Each barangay shall ensure
the participation or representation of elderly women and differently-abled within
the Barangay Council for Women in order to advance the interest of this special
group of women.

SECTION 5. ASSISTANCE FUNDS FOR THE ELDERLY WOMEN. Funds
shall be allocated for assistance and psychological help for the elderly women to
include, but not limited to, emergency assistance, routine physical check-up,
social group work program and appropriate socioeconomic activities.

The funds shall be taken from the Annual GAD Budget of the Local
Government Unit of Davao City in accordance with the General Appropriations Act
(GAA) and other related laws.

SECTION 6. SUPPORT TO WOMEN DEPRIVED OF LIBERTY. The rights of all
women deprived of liberty shall be protected in the following:

a) Speedy trial of their cases shall be ensured by all concerned. To ensure speedy trial of their cases, free legal services, if
opted by the detainee, shall be given to her by the local government;

b) An appropriate program shall be designed to respond to their
specific needs and problems as women person deprived of
liberty. A woman detainee shall be protected against all
aspects of sexual abuse. A male jail guard or any other
person charged in custody of the woman detainee shall be
prohibited within the area unless circumstances would deem
it necessary;

c) Separate structure and space for detention and rehabilitation
shall be provided.

--- [Page 27] ---
Page 27 of 45
Ord. No. 0333-20
SECTION 7. RESPECT FOR WOMEN'S SEXUAL ORIENTATION, CULTURAL IDENTITY, GENDER IDENTITY AND EXPRESSION, RELIGION AND POLITICAL AFFILIATION, AND ECONOMIC STATUS AND BELIEF: Women's right to sexual orientation, gender identity, and expression, as well as cultural identity, religion, political affiliation, and economic status and belief shall be respected and protected at all times and in all spheres.
ARTICLE X
Womenand Childen Support System
SECTION 1. EARLY CHILDHOOD CARE AND DEVELOPMENT AND CHILD-MINDING CENTERS: The City Government of Davao shall ensure that Early Childhood Care and Development, in all barangays and Child-Minding Centers in every district are set up to free women from other activities such as taking a job or going back to school without prejudice to the Davao City Children's Welfare Code.
SECTION 2. PARENTAL AUTHORITY: The father and mother shall jointly exercise parental authority over the persons of their common children. In case of disagreement, the couple shall consult their family counsel or shall bring the matter before the LupongTingapampayapa for conciliation, except in cases violating RA 9262.
SECTION 3. WOMEN IN SPORTS: The City shall develop, establish, and strengthen programs for the participation of women and girl-children in competitive and noncompetitive sports as a means to achieve excellence, promote physical and social well-being, eliminate gender-role stereotyping, and provide equal access to the full benefits of development for all persons regardless of sex, gender identity, and other similar factors.
Sports tournament/s held by the City or those done within the City shall offer or award equal sports prize, with respect to its amount or value, to women and men winners in the same sports category.
ARTICLE XI
GenderandDevelopment
SECTION 1. GAD INSTITUTIONAL MECHANISMS: Pursuant to RA 9710, the City Government of Davao shall ensure the implementation of the following institutional mechanisms:
a) Creation and/or strengthening of the LGU GAD Focal Point System (GFPS);
b) Establishment and maintenance of GAD database;
c) Gender and Development (GAD) planning and budgeting;
d) Mainstreaming gender perspectives in local development plans;
e) Periodic review and enhancement and implementation of the LGU GAD Code; and
f) Monitoring and evaluating the implementation of the Magna Carta of Women.

--- [Page 28] ---
**Page 28 of 45
Ord. No. 0339-20**

**SECTION 2. Maintenance of GAD Database:** Pursuant to the Women Development Code and the Magna Carta of Women, the City shall maintain a sex-disaggregated data which shall form part of its GAD Database and will be analyzed appropriately by GFPS for consideration in its annual GAD Planning and Budgeting. The IGCD shall be the repository and custodian of the city's GAD Database.

**SECTION 3. GFPS CAPACITY-BUILDING ACTIVITIES:** The City Government of Devao shall ensure that all members of GFPS including elected officials and functionaries undergo capacity building programs on GAD which shall include, but not be limited to:

a) Gender Sensitivity Training (GST);
b) Gender-responsive planning and budgeting;
c) Gender analysis;
d) Gender audit;
e) GAD tools such as:

i. Gender Mainstreaming Evaluation Framework;
ii. Gender Responsive LGU Ka Ba (GeRLKuBa);
iii. Harmonized Gender and Development Guidelines;
iv. Other GAD tools.

**SECTION 4. THE GENDER AND DEVELOPMENT (GAD) PLAN:** The GAD Plan is a systematically designed set of programs, projects, and activities carried out by an agency over a given period of time. It addresses gender issues and concerns of the agency's clients and its personnel and is an integral part of the agency's annual agency/development plan.

The GAD budget, which is the cost of implementing the GAD plan, shall be not less than 5% of the City's yearly budget and shall form part of and is not in addition to the City's Annual Budget.

For effective planning and implementation of GAD PPAs, essential elements in GAD planning and budgeting should be in place, such as consultation with employees and constituencies through accredited women or people/civil society organizations, among others to ensure the relevance of their GPPs, adherence to Executive Order 43 s. 2011 (Social Contract), bottom-up budgeting, capacity development on gender mainstreaming, gender-responsive planning, and budgeting, gender analysis, and gender assessment for GFPS, GPD implementation should not be affected by austerity measures.

In identifying GAD PPAs, priority is given to emerging and/or continuing issues and concerns on:

a. Provision of basic services and facilities to protect and fulfill women's human rights, including the right to protection from all forms of violence;

--- [Page 29] ---
Page 29 of 45
Ord. No. 0333-20

b. Women's economic empowerment, including women's participation in economic governance;
c. Participation in local governance and decision-making; and
d. Other provisions of the Magna Carta of Women.

Preparation and submission of GAD Plan shall be one (1) year ahead. The same shall be accompanied by a GAD Accomplishment Report during the previous year. Forms used shall be that prescribed by TDI LG and PCW.

SECTION 5. ORGANIZING OF MEN AS PARTNERS IN GAD. All barangays in the City shall facilitate the organization of men within their locality to serve as partners of the BCW and the City, in general, in all of its GAD advocacies and/or endeavors. Specifically, Men's Responsibility on Gender and Development (MR.GAD) programs shall seek to reach out to men in barangays to collectively discuss, learn, and initiate activities as men, to promote equality of men and women and to end all forms of discrimination and violence against women, hence promoting peace and harmony in the community.

SECTION 6. ACTIVE SUPPORT TO GENDER STUDIES. A sufficient amount shall be allotted to gender-related documentation and researches which shall form part of Davao City's data-based program development.

SECTION 7. POPULARIZATION OF GENDER-FAIR MATERIALS. There shall be an active promotion and publication of gender-fair material in popular forms in Davao City.

SECTION 8. INTEGRATED GENDER-SENSITIVE AND ENVIRONMENT FRIENDLY ZONIFICATION PLAN OF DAVAO CITY. An Integrated gender-sensitive and environment-friendly zonification plan of Davao City shall constitute the following, but not limited to:
a) Relocation of communities shall not deprive women of their sources of livelihood.
b) Relocation sites shall not contribute to an increase in women's burden in economic, home, and social production.
c) Housing and industrial project sites shall be those unproductive lands unsuitable for economic purposes.
d) Industrial center for light industry shall be placed in key districts of Davao City while heavy industry shall be centralized in one district.

SECTION 9. COMMUNITY-BASED ENVIRONMENTAL PLANS AND PROGRAMS. Both men and women shall participate in pollution control, zero-waste technology development and management, preservation of the forest, marine, and aquatic resources and indigenous reforestation with due respect for the indigenous and Moro peoples culture and rights to self-determination.

--- [Page 30] ---
Page 30 of 45
Ord. No. 0333-20

SECTION 10. GENDER-SENSITIVE NATURAL RESOURCES-BASED MANAGEMENT PROGRAMS. The Local Government of Davao City shall engage it self in the development of gender sensitive natural resources-based management programs.

SECTION 11. ROLE OF WOMEN IN ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT OF PROJECTS. The Local Government of Davao City shall promote the active role of women in environmental impact assessment and shall consciously determine sex disaggregated data.

SECTION 12. PROMOTION OF APPROPRIATE TECHNOLOGY. The Local Government of Davao City shall actively promote an alternative technology that is appropriate and safe for women.

SECTION 13. CREATION OF RESOURCE MANAGEMENT COUNCIL. Each barangay shall create a resource management council which shall ensure promotion and protection of ecological balance and full participation of women.

SECTION 14. SUFFICIENT BUDGET FOR BASIC SOCIAL SERVICES. A sufficient amount for the basic social services for women and children in extremely difficult circumstances shall be allocated from all sources of funds.

SECTION 15. INVESTMENT AND LOANS. The City Government of Davao shall hold consultative assemblies with women GOs and NGOs in establishing contracts for loans and investments to clarify implications on women's welfare and development at the Barangay level.

SECTION 16. OVERSEAS FILIPINOS (OFS) WIVES AND CHILDREN SUPPORT. The Local Government of Davao City shall conduct at the barangay level a survey of Overseas Filipino Workers, result of which shall serve as basis for special support to women and children.

SECTION 17. SPECIAL COURSE ON OFS. A special course on overseas contract work primarily to orient women on the issues and concerns relative to migration shall be systematically introduced to all women especially at the barangay level.

SECTION 18. EDUCATION ON NATIONAL POLICIES. Women and Men shall undertake education on national policies and their implications on women.

SECTION 19. SPECIAL TRAINING AND CAPACITY-BUILDING FOR ALL SERVICE PROVIDERS. A special para-legal training and capacity-building for all Service providers shall be conducted along gender question and related matters.

--- [Page 31] ---
Page 31 of 45
Ord. No. 0333-20

SECTION 20. GENDER SENSITIZATION AS A MEASURE,
ASSESSMENT OR PART OF ORIENTATION TO EMPLOYMENT AND
PROMOTION. There shall be a gender-sensitive assessment to be conducted by the Gender and Development Office to all concerned as a measure to hiring and promotion of personnel.

SECTION 21. GENDER AND POPULATION. The City Health Office through the Population Division shall review and redesign the population program so that it becomes not contraceptive-based but reproductive health conscious.

SECTION 22. TRAINING ON NON-TRADITIONAL OCCUPATION. Women shall be given opportunity to acquire training on non-traditional occupation such as those related to science and technologies.

SECTION 23. WOMEN PROTECTION DESK: There shall be a Women Protection Desk in all levels of establishment that will serve as quick response to the immediate concerns regarding violation of women's right.

SECTION 24. LCAT - VAWC COMPOSITION. A Local Committee Against Trafficking and Violence Against Women and Children (LCAT-
VAWC) shall be established.

The following are the members of the City Committee on Anti-
Trafficking and -Violence Against Women and their Children:

1. City Mayor as the Chairperson
2. City Planning and Development Coordinator
3. City Social Welfare and Development Officer as the Secretary
4. City Health Officer
5. Chairperson of the Committee on Women, Children, and Family Relations of the Sangguniang Panlungsod
6. City Public Employment Services Officer
7. City Prosecutor
8. DILG City Director
9. Davao City Police Office Director
10. Representatives of the following sectors:
a. Women
b. Children;
c. Overseas Filipino Workers.

The LCAT-VAWC shall be chaired by the Local Chief Executive or her designated representative and likewise designate the Co-chair of the LCAT-VAWC as well as decide on organizational matters affecting the performance of its functions.

Powers and Functions of LCAT - VAWC of Davao City. The Local Committee on Anti-Trafficking and Violence Against Women and Children of Davao City shall have the following powersandfunctions:

--- [Page 32] ---
Page 32 of 45
Ord. No. 0337-20
a) Institute policies and programs to protect women and children who are victims of trafficking and violence;
b) Create and establish systems of surveillance, investigations, and rescue to ensure effective allocation and coordination;
c) Undertake information, education, and advocacy campaign against trafficking in persons and VAWC;
d) Monitor and oversee the strict implementation of RA 9208, RA 9262, and other related laws for the protection of women and children, and of the IACAT and IACVWC national plans of action;
e) Undertake guidance and counseling to women abroad as fiancées of foreign nationals regarding protection of women and children against trafficking and violence;
f) Make representations to schools and universities for the inclusion of migration and its implications for women in all levels of curricula;
g) Refer trafficked persons and victims of VAWC to appropriate agencies;
h) Formulate a program for returning trafficked persons and victims of VAWC, in cooperation with local officers of DOLE, TESDA, and other government agencies involved in training and livelihood development;
i) Secure assistance from any of the local government units, departments or bureaus of the national government;
j) Exercise all powers and functions necessary to attain its purposes and objectives.
SECTION 25. CITY GAD FOCAL POINT SYSTEM (GFPS). A Local Gender and Development Focal Point System for the City of Davao shall be established.
The City GFPS shall adhere to the structure and composition provided for in the MCW-JRR as follows:
1. To carry out its functions, the LGU GFPS shall have an Executive Committee (ExecCom), a Technical Working Group, and/or a Secretariat.
2. The City Mayor shall also designate an alternate Chair and Vice-Chair for GFPS.
3. The GFPS TWG Chair shall be elected among the GFPS TWG members. The designation of the GFPS TWG Chair shall be made official through the filing of a Memorandum of Intent signed by the City Mayor and endorsed by his or her immediate supervisor or concerned LGU Department Head. The GFPS TWG Chair may designate a secretariat to assist the TWG in its functions.
4. The Barangay GFPS shall be chaired by the Pangunang Barangay, co-chaired by the Chair of the Sanpungnang Barangay Committee on Women, Children and Family Relations, with the following as the members:

--- [Page 33] ---
Page 33 of 45
Ord. No. 0333-20
i. Sangguniang Barangay Committee on Appropriations
ii. SK Chairperson
iii. Barangay Health Worker
iv. Barangay Treasurer
v. Violence Against Women (VAW) Desk Officer
vi. Barangay Nutrition Scholar
vii. Tandang Executive Officer
viii. Day Care Worker Lupong Taagamayapa member
ix. Women's organizations existing at the Barangay level
x. Barangay Human Rights Action Officer, where
existent
xi. Members of the private sector and academe, as appropriate

The Barangay Secretary shall provide secretariat support to the Barangay GFPS.

5. All LGUs shall ensure that all members of the GFPS including elected local officials and department heads undergo capacity building programs on GAD which shall include, but not be limited to: gender sensitivity training (GST), gender-responsive planning and budgeting, gender analysis, gender audit and GAD tools such as the Gender Mainstreaming Evaluation Framework (GMEF), Gender Responsive (GU) Ka Ba (GRRK Ba) Self-assessment Tool, Harmonized Gender Development Guidelines (HGDG) and other succeeding GAD tools.

General Functions of the LGU GFPS
Pursuant to the MCW-JRR, GFPS is tasked to ensure and sustain the LGU's critical consciousness in supporting gender and development, women's empowerment and responding to gender issues. It shall take a lead role in direction-setting, advocacy, coordination, monitoring, evaluation, and technical advisory in mainstreaming GAD perspectives in the LGU's programs, projects, activities, and processes. Specifically, GFPS shall perform the following functions:

a. Lead in mainstreaming GAD perspectives in LGU policies, plans and programs. In the process, they shall ensure the assessment of the gender-responsiveness of systems, structures, policies, programs, and projects and allocate resources based on the priority needs and concerns of constituencies and employees, and the formulation of recommendations including their implementation;

b. Assist in the formulation of new policies and enhancement of existing policies such as the Women Development Code in advancing women's empowerment and gender equality;

c. Lead in setting up appropriate systems and mechanisms to ensure the generation, processing, review, and updating of sex-identification data that is capable to serve as basis in performance-based and gender-responsive planning and budgeting;

--- [Page 34] ---
Page 34 of 45
Ord. No. 0333-20
d. Coordinate efforts of different divisions/offices/units of the LGU
and advocate for the integration of GAD perspectives in all their systems and processes;
e. Spearhead the preparation of the annual and performance-based Gendered GAD Plan and Budget (GPP) in response to the gender issues and concerns of their locality and in the context of the LGU mandate and consolidate the same, following the four guidelines as prescribed in DILG, DBM, PCW, and NEDA JMC No. 2013 - 01;
f. Lead in monitoring the effective implementation of the annual GPD, GAD Code, and other GAD related policies and plans;
g. Lead the preparation of the annual LGU GAD Accomplishment Report (GAD AR) and other GAD reports that may be required under the MCW and DILG, DBM, PCW, and NEDA JMC No. 2013 - 01;
h. Strengthen linkages with other LGUs concerned agencies or organizations on women's rights and gender development to harmonize and synchronize GAD efforts at various levels of local governance;
i. Promote and actively pursue the participation of women and gender advocates, other civil society groups and private organizations in the various stages of development planning cycle giving attention to marginalized sectors;
j. Ensure that all personnel of the LGU including the planning and finance officers (e.g., accountants, budget officers, auditors) are capacitated on GAD. Along this line, GPPs will recommend and plan an annual human resource development program on GAD for its employees as part and implemented under its regular human resource development program.
Roles and Responsibilities of the LGU GPPs
a. The City Mayor shall:
i. Issue policies, plans, PPAs, and services of the LGU as well as the budget, systems, processes, and procedures of the LGU, including the creation, strengthening, modification or reconstitution of GPPs;
ii. Ensure the implementation of GPP and approve GAD AR and other GAD-related reports of the LGU as may be required by the MCW, IRR and DILG, DBM, PCW, and NEDA JMC No. 2013 - 01.
b. The GPP Executive Committee shall:
i. Provide policy advice to the City Mayor to support and strengthen GPPs and the LGU's gender mainstreaming efforts;
ii. Direct the identification of GAD strategies, PPAs and targets based on the results of gender analysis and gender assessment taking into account the identified priorities of the LGU and the gender issues and concerns faced by the LGU's constituents and employees;

--- [Page 35] ---
Page 35 of 45
Ord. No. 0333-20
III. Ensure the timely submission of the LGU GBP, GAD AR, and other GAD-related reports to DILG which shall be consolidated for submission to PCV and appropriate oversight agencies;
IV. Ensure the effective and efficient implementation of the GAD PPAs and the judicious utilization of the GAD budget;
v. Build and strengthen the partnership of the LGU with concerned stakeholders such as women's groups or CSOs, national government agencies, GAD experts and advocates, among others, in pursuit of gender mainstreaming;
VI. Recommend awards and/or incentives to recognize outstanding GAD PPAs or individuals who have made exemplary contributions to GAD.
C. The Technical Working Group (TWG) shall:
i. Facilitate the gender mainstreaming efforts of the LGU through the GAD planning and budgeting process;
ii. Formulate the LGU GBP in response to the gender gaps and issues faced by their constituents including their weaknesses;
iii. Assist in the capacity and competency development and provide technical assistance to the offices or units of the LGU. In this regard, the TWG will work with the Human Resource Management Office (HRMO) on the development and implementation of a capacity development program on GAD for its employees, as necessary;
iv. Coordinate with the various units/offices of the LGU and ensure their meaningful participation in strategic and annual planning exercises on GAD including the preparation, consolidation, and submission of GPDs;
v. Lead the conduct of advocacy activities and the development of information, education, and communication (IEC) materials to ensure critical support of local elected officials, department heads and staff, and relevant stakeholders to the GFPS and to gender mainstreaming;
vi. Monitor the implementation of GAD-related PPAs and suggest corrective measures to improve their implementation;
vii. Prepare and consolidate LGU GAD ARs and other GAD-related reports; and
viii. Provide regular updates and recommendations to the LCE or GFPS ExeCom regarding GPDs' activities and the process of the LGU in gender mainstreaming based on the feedback and reports of concerned LGU officers/units, stakeholders and constituents.

--- [Page 36] ---
Page 36 of 45
Ord. No. 0333-20
d. The GFPS Secretariat and whenever feasible the GAD office or unit designated by the LCE shall assist the GFPS ExecCom and the TWG in the performance of their roles and responsibilities, specifically on the provision of administrative and logistical services; preparation of meeting agenda; and documentation of GFPS meetings and related GAD activities.
6. In the event of a change in local administration, the remaining members of the GFPS ExecCom and TWG shall facilitate the immediate reconstitution of the GFPS and the conduct of GST and other GAD competency development activities for newly-elected local officials.
7. LGUs through their GFPS shall strengthen their linkages and/or partnerships with the local offices of the NGAs, private sector, academic, Official Development Assistance (ODA) partners, and other stakeholders in pursuit of their gender mainstreaming efforts.
SECTION 2. THE INTEGRATED GENDER AND DEVELOPMENT OFFICE (IGD). A separate ordinance creating the Integrated Gender and Development Office shall be enacted within five (5) years following the approval of this Ordinance. Such legislative enactment shall provide for the transfer of personnel, funds, and resources from the current IGD to the IGD. At the minimum, the operations of the current IGD shall be transferred to IGD.
The IGD shall primarily be responsible for ensuring the implementation of this Code along with its coordination, monitoring, and evaluation functions. In the interim, the IGD shall appropriate upon itself the duties and functions to implement the provisions of this Ordinance.
BOOK II - FINAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 1 - PENAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE I
Violence Against Women and Children
SECTION 1. Soliciting Women's Services. It is unlawful for a person to solicit a woman's service for sexual purposes as gift, representation, public relations, or as an act of good will regardless of whether the solicitor profits or not from such act without prejudice to the provisions of the Revised Penal Code.
Any witness may file a complaint together with the affected women to the proper court. Penalty for such is a fine of P5,000 or imprisonment of one year.
SECTION 2. OTHER FORMS OF TRAFFICKING IN WOMEN. Any person or agency who with the use of force or deceit, lures a woman to work abroad or in other provinces or cities in the Philippines for a particular job on a promise of high fees but instead landed on prostitution, domestic help, or other odd jobs. Violators of this provision shall be penalized by imprisonment of one year or a fine of P5,000.00 or both, at the discretion of the court.

--- [Page 37] ---
**SECTION 3. SEXTRADE.** Any agency or person who shall engage in keeping women for sex for a fee shall suffer the penalty in accordance with the Revised Penal Code.

**SECTION 4. SEXTOURS.** No hotels, beach resorts, sauna baths, and related establishments shall be allowed to operate as conduit for sex tours. Cancellation of business permit, a fine of P5,000.00, and imprisonment of one year shall constitute the penalty for violation.

**SECTION 5. "BEAUTY" CONTEST.** Beauty contests that tend to commodify, abuse, humiliate, and treat women as sex objects shall be strictly prohibited in schools, communities, barangays, and by the City Government in its special celebrations; but in their stead the projection of women's strengths and potentials, especially with regard to indigenous and culturally-relevant forms shall be encouraged.

Those who initiated the conceptualization and implementation of the beauty contest shall be subjected to a penalty consisting of the following:

For business organizations:
a) Cancellation of business permit;
b) Fine of P5,000; and
c) Others, as prescribed in the Implementing Rules and Regulations of this Code.

For representative of agencies, departments or units of the Local Government of Davao City:
a) Suspension for one month without pay;
b) Fine of P5,000.00; and
c) Others, as prescribed in the Implementing Rules and Regulations of this Code.

For educational institutions, charity or welfare organizations:
a) Cancellation of licenses to operate;
b) Fine of P5,000.00; and
c) Others, as prescribed in the Implementing Rules and Regulations of this code.

**SECTION 6. FUND RAISING INITIATIVES.** All fund-raising initiatives as defined in this Code shall be strictly prohibited in Davao City. Violators of this provision shall pay a fine of P5,000, or imprisonment of six months, or both at the discretion of the court.

**SECTION 7. WOMEN IN ARMED CONFLICT SITUATION.** a) No women shall be deprived of basic social services in armed conflict areas.

--- [Page 38] ---
Page 38 of 45
Ord. No. 0333-20
b) No women or girl children shall be kept by any PNP/military personnel in police/military detachment/check point or any analogous quarter for purposes of comfort.
The violation shall be penalized through summary dismissal proceeding of the local AFP/PPM and/or at the discretion of the Court.
SECTION 8. CONSCIOUS SURVEILLANCE OF ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS. A regular Task Force shall be created to conduct conscious surveillance of entertainment establishments exploiting women. Failure of the Task Force to submit weekly reports thereof to the City Health Officer (CHO), City Welfare and Development Bureau, Department of Public Order and Police Office (DOPPO), and Civil Society Organization to be recommended by the members of the Task Force and approved by the City Government.
ARTICLE II
Cultural Identity of Women
SECTION 1. INDIGENOUS AND MORO CULTURAL PRACTICES. Indigenous and Moro women shall be allowed enrollment in schools and colleges and enjoy employment opportunities without prejudice to their birth and marriage rituals where no birth and marriage certificates are issued as evidence of such life events.Failure to comply with this provision shall be subjected to a maximum fine of P5,000.
Implementing Rules and Regulations of this Section shall include issuance of certificate by the local offices of the Office of Southern Cultural Communities and National Commission on Muslim Filipinos identifying cultural community affiliation.
ARTICLE III
Labor and Employment
SECTION 1. EQUAL ACCESS TO JOB TRAINING AND PROMOTION. No woman shall be deprived of job training and promotion on account of her sex, gender, age, ethnicity, creed, religion and civil status. Violations by private employers shall constitute a fine of P5,000 and cancellation of business permit or as prescribed by the court. Government unit or agency head of office is liable with the penalty of three-month suspension and a fine of P5,000,000.
SECTION 2. Wage and Benefits for Women. Every employer shall comply with the minimum wage as stipulated by the Regional Wage Board or passed by Congress and shall grant all benefits to all women employees such as maternity leave, sick and vacation leave, retirement, termination and other benefits provided by law. Violation by private employers shall constitute a fine of P5,000,000 and cancellation of business permit or as prescribed by the Court. Government unit or agency head of office is liable with the penalty of three months suspension and a fine of P5,000,000.

--- [Page 39] ---
**Page 39 of 45
Ord. No. 0333-20**

**SECTION 3. FACILITIES AND SUPPORT SYSTEMS FOR WOMEN.**
The City Government of Davao shall ensure the safety and health of women employees. Inappropriate cases, it shall require employers to:
a. Provide seats proper for women and permit them to use such seats when they are free from work and during working hours. Provided they can perform their duties in this position without detriment to efficiency;
b. Establish separate toilet rooms, lavatories and lounge for men and women and provide at least a dressing room for women;
c. Establish a nursery or a child minder center in the workplace for the benefit of the women employees therein; and
d. Provide breast feeding centers for women in the workplaces.

Violation by private employers shall constitute a fine of PhP5,000.00 and cancellation of business permit or as prescribed by the Court. Government unit or agency head of office is liable with the penalty of three months suspension and a fine of PhP5,000.00.

**SECTION 4. REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH SERVICES.** Big companies as defined under the Labor Code, as well as labor intensive establishments shall provide reproductive health services to working women regardless of civil status as a manifestation of concern for women's role in social production. Cancellation of business permit or license to operate and a fine of PhP5,000.00 shall constitute the penalty for violation of this provision.

**SECTION 5. ORIENTATION ON SEXUAL HARASSMENT.** All local offices agencies and establishments or companies, government and private, in Davao City shall conduct annual orientation on sexual harassment. Failure to comply with this provision shall pay a fine of not less than PhP3,000.00 or at the discretion of the Court. The head of office shall be held liable through an administrative sanction.

**SECTION 6. GENDER-SENSITIVE PHYSICAL PLANT.** A physical plant appropriate for a gender-sensitive environment shall be adopted by all offices, agencies and establishments or companies, which shall help prevent sexual harassment, sexual abuse and other forms of abuse and maltreatment in workplaces.

Monitoring team shall be composed of representative of the Offices of the City Engineer's Office, City Social Welfare and Development Office and Integrated Gender and Development Division to conduct inspection in compliance with the above provision.

Failure to comply this provision shall mean payment of a fine and suspension of business permit or license to operate for three months. For Local Government Department or agency, an administrative sanction shall be imposed for which the Head of Office shall be held liable.

--- [Page 40] ---
**Page 40 of 45**

**Ord. No. 0333-20**

**SECTION 7. Increase Maternity Leave Benefits as Incentives for Breastfeeding Mothers in the Public and Private Sector.** In accordance with RA 11210, maternity leave benefits of 105 days shall be extended to all women employees (public and private) who have rendered at least one year of continuous service, provided that 105 days of the leave period shall be used for breastfeeding her newborn baby.

Employer who violates this provision shall pay a fine of P5,000.00 and a suspension of business permit or license to operate for six months. For Local Government department or agency, an administrative sanction shall be imposed.

**SECTION 8. Barangay-Based Kasamahay Support.** All barangays in Davao City shall conduct compulsory education for both Kasamahay and Kasambahay employers on gender-sensitivity. An administrative sanction shall be imposed.

**SECTION 9. Rescue.** Police, together with the social workers, shall be part in the conduct of rescues in entertainment establishments. Violation of this provision shall be subjected to an administrative sanction.

**ARTICLE IV Health Right**

**SECTION 1. Reproductive Health Services for All Hospitals.** No hospital in Davao City shall deny a woman of reproductive health services.

In case of emergency, a social worker or any authorized personnel shall be designated to conduct rapid appraisal of the socio-economic status of the patient for admission purposes. Non-compliance of the Administrator of this provision shall be penalized by a fine of not more than P5,000.00.

**ARTICLE V Socio-Economic Benefits for Women**

**SECTION 1. Socialized Lending for Women.**

a) All banks, financial lending institutions, and cooperatives shall open special windows for lending to women including young women who lack access to traditional sources of collateral.

b) No woman shall be deprived of credit. Money lending institutions shall establish a "socialized lending scheme friendly to women" which shall constitute the following:

1. Bank rate interest;
2. No post-dated checks;
3. Certificate of Income Generating Activity from Barangay Captain.

--- [Page 41] ---
Page 41 of 45
Ord. No. 0333-20

Non-compliance of this provision shall be subjected to a fine of not less than P3,000.00 and suspension of business permit or its equivalent.

ARTICLE VI
Rural Women's Rights
SECTION 1. PROMOTION OF ENVIRONMENT-FRIENDLY TECHNOLOGIES. No Local Government agency or its representative shall act as agent of inorganic fertilizers, herbicides, and pesticides. An administrative sanction shall be imposed to head of agencies upon violation of this provision.

ARTICLE VII
Special Sectoral Concerns
SECTION 1. BARANGAY-LEVEL SANCTION ON CASES OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT COMMITTED AGAINST WOMEN WITH DISABILITY. All barangays in Davao City shall formulate a barangay-level sanction on cases of sexual harassment committed against women with disability. Failure to comply with this provision shall subject the barangay council to an administrative sanction.

ARTICLE VIII
Women and Children
SECTION 1. SUPPORT TO WOMEN AND CHILDREN. All agreements or settlements arrived at the barangay level relative to the support of the children shall be final and executory. Violation of such agreements or settlements shall be subjected to a fine of P5,000.00 and an imprisonment of one year.

ARTICLE IX
Gender and Development
SECTION 1. GENDER SENSITIVITY ORIENTATION AND TRAINING. This shall be conducted in all schools and offices. Establishments or companies, departments and agencies including barangay officials of the Local Government of Davao City shall initiate gender sensitivity orientation and training which shall equip them with theoretical knowledge on gender justice. Non-compliance of this provision shall require the concerned party to pay a fine of P5,000.00 and issuance of warning by the Integrated Gender and Development Office. Likewise all establishments, schools, colleges and universities shall develop assessment tool for gender biases.

CHAPTER II
Provisions for Implementation
SECTION 1. Creation of the Integrated Gender and Development Office. The Integrated Gender and Development Office of Davao City shall be created through a separate Ordinance within five (5) years from the approval of this Ordinance, specifically to realize the provisions of this Ordinance.

--- [Page 42] ---
Page 42 of 45
Ord. No. 0333-20

It shall be the coordinative, regulatory and monitoring body of the Local Government of Davao City to focus on gender-sensitive projects and activities. It will become the local but distinct expression of the Philippine Commission on Women (PCW).

SECTION 2. MINIMUM FUNCTIONS OF THE INTEGRATED GENDER AND DEVELOPMENT OFFICE. In relation to the preceding section, IGGD shall have the following functions, at the minimum, to ensure consistency in the implementation of the provisions of this Ordinance:

a. Monitoring and Coordinative Functions. These functions shall see through the realistic, measurable and tangible results of the implementation of the provisions of this Ordinance:

* Gender Sensitive Watch. A system of services and facilities in order to monitor status of women in the City of Davao wherein all departments and agencies of Davao City shall develop conceptual and practical methodologies for incorporating gender perspectives into all aspects of economy and policy-making. It shall collect gender and age disaggregated data on poverty situation and all aspects of economic activity and develop qualitative and quantitative statistical performance from a gender perspective. It shall also serve as the data bank of Davao City on gender and development.
* Legal Aid Services Check. Coordinated services for any legal actions needed by the women in protecting their rights shall be installed.
* Advocacy and Campaign Management. A coordinated advocacy and campaign on all forms of discrimination and violence against women shall be programmed.
* SustainableGenderSensitiveProjectDevelopment. A systematic appraisal of project determines sustainable impact on women and men, local economy, politics, culture and ecosystem.
* Violence in Media Check. An active dialogue with tri-media representatives shall be undertaken by the Sangguniang Panlalawigan Committee on Women's Welfare and Development, GOs and NGOs on incidence of all forms of violence in media.

b. Regulatory Function. This function shall include establishing protocols and standards relevant to the following concerns:

* Education and Training Benchmark. Gender-sensitivity education and training for all departments and agencies of the Local Government of Davao City and at the barangay level shall be designed.

--- [Page 43] ---
Page 43 of 45
Ord. No. 0333-20
Standards for contents of the course shall be established by the Office.
Psychosocial Support Program. A holistic and indigenous approach to women with social dysfunction which includes attendance to their physical/biological, emotional, psychological and social needs shall be setup. Indicators of program success shall be established by the Office.
Early Childhood Care and Development Program and Services. Appropriate support services for women and children shall include nurseries and Child-Minding Centers and day care services for infants and toddlers as prescribed in RA6972 and the Davao City Children's Welfare Code. Indicators of quality of services shall be established by the Office.
It shall be involved in all the processes related to the conceptualization, development, assessment and evaluation of programs and projects of the Local Government of Davao City.
SECTION 3. ROLE OF THE BARANGAY COUNCIL OF WOMEN OF DAVAO CITY. The Davao City Barangay Council of Women shall become the consultative-assembly of the Integrated Gender and Development Office for its periodic planning and programming, programs implementation, monitoring, assessment and evaluation.
The federation of all BCWs from the different barangays shall hold its Annual Women's Summit every March of every year. Such summit shall be the avenue for the women of Davao City to discuss, promote, recommend policies, programs, projects for gender and development. The same shall be the avenue where women will elect their Sectoral Representative to the City Council every election year.
SECTION 4. RULES AND REGULATIONS. Through an Executive Order, an Executive Committee composed of the City Prosecutor's Office, City Legal Office, City Social Welfare and Development Office and the Committee on Women, Children and Family Relations of the Sanguaniang Panlungsang shall promulgate the rules and regulations necessary to carry on the provisions of this Ordinance.
A consultative body shall be convened periodically throughout the formulation of the Implementing Rules and Regulations which shall be composed of official representatives of the various agencies of the Local Government and Women NGGs involved in the process of drafting of this Code.

--- [Page 44] ---
Page 44 of 45
Ord. No. 0333-20

A Technical Working Group shall be formed for an effective and efficient realization of the Implementing Rules and Regulations.

Such rules and regulations shall take effect upon its publication in local newspapers of general circulation in the City of Davao.

SECTION 5. APPROPRIATIONS. For the effective implementation of this Ordinance, the Local Government of Davao City shall allocate the amount appropriated from official development assistance as stipulated in RA7192 and RA 9710. It shall also appropriate six percent (6%) from its Total Annual Budget to represent Davao City's Annual GAD Budget from which the implementation of this Ordinance shall be charged.

CHAPTER III FINAL PROVISIONS

SECTION 1. SEPARABILITY CLAUSE - If for any reason, any section or provision of this Ordinance is declared unconstitutional or invalid, the other sections or provisions hereof which are not affected herby shall continue to be in full force and effect.

SECTION 2. REPEALING CLAUSE - All Ordinances, local issuances or rules in consistent with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 3. EFFECTIVITY - This Ordinance shall take effect upon approval and after publication in the newspaper of general circulation in the City of Davao.

ENACTED, on the 25th day of August 2020, by a unanimous vote of all the Members of the Sanggunian, there being a quorum.

CERTIFIED CORRECT:
CHARTON N. SANTOS
Secretary to the Sanggunian/Parlungsod
(City Government Department Head II)

ATTESTED:
EDGAR P. IBUYAN JR.
President Pro Tempore
Temporary Presiding Officer
Davao City

--- [Page 45] ---
Page 45 of 45
Ord. No. 0333-20
APPROVED: JAN 7 8 2021
2020
SARA Z. DUTERTE
City Mayor
ATTESTED:
ATTY. ZULEIKAT T. LOPEZ
City Administrator
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 5004, SERIES OF 1997, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE
"WOMEN DEVELOPMENT CODE TO STRENGTHEN STRUCTURES AND MECHANISMS IN ADDRESSING THE
EVOLVING CONCERNS OF WOMEN AND CHILDREN
