=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 0000042-02 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
13th City Council
27th Regular Session
Series of 2002

Republika ng Pilipinas
SANGGUNIANG PANLUNGSSOD
Lungsod ng Dabaw

PRESENT:
Vice Mayor Luis C. Bongniyan- Presiding Officer
Councilor Nilo G. Abellera
Councilor Ma. Belen S. Acosta
Councilor Victorio S. Advincula, Sr.
Councilor Leonardo R. Avila, III
Councilor Gerald B. Bangoy
Councilor Salvador V. Caingles
Councilor Damico C. Dayanghurag
Councilor Shane L. Dolor
Councilor Emmanuel D. Galicia, Sr.
Councilor Frances Mabel A. Laman
Councilor Peter T. Lavilla
Councilor Angela A. Librado
Councilor Liborio V. Lumang
Councilor Diosdado Angelo A. Mahipus, Sr.
Councilor Teresita M. Marañon
Councilor Bonifacio E. Militar
Councilor Beethoven L. Orcullo
Councilor Myrna G. L'Dalido-Oritz
Councilor Susan Isabel C. Reza
Councilor Dioscoro B. Sampanga, Jr.

ON OFFICIAL BUSINESS:
Councilor Isidro S. Calonius, Jr.-Manila

ABSENT:
Councilor Wilberto E. Al-ag
Councilor Alexis C. Almendras- On Sick Leave
Councilor Jimmy G. Dureza- On Sick Leave
Councilor Tomas J. Monteverde, IV- On Sick Leave
Councilor Isidro T. Ungab- On Sick Leave

ORDINANCE NO. 042-02
Series of 2002

AN ORDINANCE AMENDING AND
MODIFYING THE TRUCK BAN
ORDINANCES OF DAVAO CITY

Be it enacted by the Sangguniang Panlungsod of Davao City in session assembled that:

--- [Page 2] ---
Page 2 of 4
Ord. No. 042-02

SECTION 1. TITLE: This Ordinance shall be known as "The Comprehensive Truck Ban Ordinance of Davao City".

SECTION 2. AREA OF COVERAGE: The entry to and exit of cargo and hauling trucks, trailers, and delivery vans are hereby prohibited from 6:00 o'clock a.m. to 9:00 o'clock p.m., except on Saturdays, Sundays, special and regular non-working holidays on any and all streets of Davao City within the area reckoned from C. Alcantara and Sons, Inc. at Km. 7, Lanang, Davao City in the North, provided that none of the banned vehicles are allowed to enter Km. 13 Panayen Junction going to Buhangin Diversion Road hereinafter specified, and in the South, at Barangay Liztada at the vicinity of the Cardano Monument, Toril, provided that none of the banned vehicles shall be allowed to enter the National Highway from Bayabas, Toril, Lubogan, Toril, Bago Aplaya, Talomo Bridge, Punta Junca, Ulas Junction, and Talomo Road near the Talomo Bridge, this City, or exit therefrom, during the time and days hereinabove specified;

SECTION 3. This Ordinance shall not apply to four-wheeler vehicles or less than four-wheel trucks, vans, and other vehicles;

SECTION 4. EXEMPTION: The list of vehicles exempted from the coverage of this Ordinance are the following, to wit:

a. Government owned garbage trucks or government-contracted garbage trucks;

b. Fire trucks;

c. Government or privately-owned towing and public utility trucks such as those owned but not limited to the Davao Light and Power Company, Telephone Companies and the Davao City Water District, but only when responding to an emergency where immediate attention is necessary so as to protect the life, health, safety and property of the public;

d. Hospital trucks and vans carrying oxygen tanks, breathing apparatus and other hospital equipment;

e. Armored trucks and vans of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas and other private banks;

f. Cargo and hauling trucks carrying fruits and vegetables, fresh water, marine products, unprocessed/impreserved dressed chicken or meat and the like, which are perishable in nature, after obtaining the necessary permit from the Traffic Management and Control Board (TMCB) or at the City Administrator's Office under the circumstances mentioned in Section 5 hereof;

g. Transit concrete mixers and dump trucks used solely for government projects and for projects intended for public use, after obtaining the necessary permit from the Traffic Management and Control Board (TMCB) of the City Administrator's Office, under the circumstances mentioned in Section 5 hereof;

h. Trucks carrying or hauling highly flammable petroleum products intended for various gasoline stations in and out of Davao City in consideration of its exceedingly significant contribution to our economy and basic needs.

--- [Page 3] ---
Page 3 of 4
Ord. No. 042-02

SECTION 5. EXEMPTION OF PERMIT FEE: Any person and company applying for exemption for transit mixers and dump trucks used solely for government projects or projects intended for public use, or cargo and hauling trucks carrying fruits and vegetables, fresh water/marine products, unprocessed/unpreserved dressed chicken or meat and the like, which are perishable in nature shall pay to the City Treasurer an annual exemption permit fee of P100.00 per vehicle upon filing of application for exemption. The permit fee shall form part of the City's General Fund;

SECTION 6. POWER TO ISSUE EXEMPTION PERMIT: In the event, or in circumstances where the Traffic Management and Control Board (TMCB) is not yet constituted or convened, or is not in session, or it is not scheduled to meet within five (5) working days, the City Administrator shall issue the necessary exemption permit upon submission of the following:

1. Letter-application for exemption;
2. Sworn statement stating the qualifying circumstance/s for the award of exemption;
3. Payment of P100.00 at the City Treasurer's Office per vehicle. The exemption permit shall be granted upon determination by the Traffic Management and Control Board (TMCB) or the City Administrator, as the case may be, that the applicant is among those enumerated under Sec. 3 hereof. Furthermore, the exemption permit will expire after the lapse of one (1) year;

SECTION 7. PENALTY CLAUSE: The owner/operator/driver of trucks, trailers, and delivery vans having entered the prohibited area within the City during the specified time and day in violation of this Ordinance shall be administratively fined as follows:

a. First Offense P 500.00;
b. Second Offense 1,000.00; and
c. Third offense and subsequent offenses 5,000.00;

SECTION 8. FINE REMITTANCES: Failure to pay the fine within ten (10) days from date of apprehension shall cause the automatic suspension of the Business Permit of the operator/owner who such suspension shall last until the fine is fully paid; provided that, if the vehicle is covered by a Business Permit issued by a Local Government Unit other than the City of Davao, the vehicle shall be impounded until the fine and imposing fee are fully paid; provided finally that in case of succeeding violations of this Ordinance involving the same vehicle or any other vehicle of the same owner/operator, the vehicle shall be impounded, and shall be released only upon full payment of the administrative fine and imposing fee under the applicable Local Tax Ordinance;

SECTION 9. The Philippine National Police - Traffic Management Group (PNP-TMG): is tasked to properly and vigorously implement this Ordinance by apprehending truck drivers/operators/owners violating the provisions of this Ordinance and the subsequent issuance of citation tickets and/or holding proper custody of the impounded vehicles for failure to pay the fine;

--- [Page 4] ---
Page 4 of 4
Ord. No. 042-02

SECTION 10. SEPARABILITY CLAUSE - If for any reason or reasons, part or provision of this Ordinance shall be held unconstitutional or invalid, other parts or provisions thereof, which are not affected thereby, shall continue to be in full force and effect;
SECTION 11. REPEALING CLAUSE - All Ordinances or parts of any Ordinance inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly;
SECTION 12. EFFECTIVITY - This Ordinance shall take effect upon approval;

ENACTED, July 9, 2002, by a majority vote of all the Members of the Sangguniang Panlungsod.

CERTIFIED CORRECT:
MARGARITO C. DELA CRUZ
Asst. Secretary to the Sangguniang Panlungsod
(City Government Asst. Department Head II)

ATTESTED:

LUP C. BONSUXAN
Vice Mayor
Presiding Officer

APPROVED:

RODILICO R. DUTERTE
City Mayor

ATTESTED:

DEO G. DELOS SANTOS
City Administrator
