=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 0546-21 (Inventions and Innovations Center) ===

--- [Page 1] ---
Republic of the Philippines
City of Davao
Office of the Sangguniang Panlungsod

19th City Council
15th Regular Session
Series of 2021

PRESENT:

Councilor Danilo C. Dayanghirang
- Temporary Presiding Officer

Councilor Ralph O. Abella
Councilor Nilo D. Abelera
Councilor Maria Belen S. Acosta
Councilor Bai Hundra Cassandra Dominique N. Advincula
Councilor Wilberto E. Al-ag
Councilor Dante L. Apostol Sr.
Councilor Conrado C. Baluran
Councilor Jessica M. Bonguyan
Councilor Lovelace B. Bonguyan
Councilor Pilar C. Braga
Councilor Augusto Javier G. Campos III
Councilor Edgar P. Ibyuan Jr.
Councilor Edgar R. Ibyuan Sr.
Councilor Richlyn N. Justol-Baguilod
Councilor Ricardo A. Librado-Morata
Councilor Diosdado Librado Junior R. Mahipus
Councilor Jaffar U. Manalagamalic
Councilor Bonifacio E. Militar
Councilor Myrna G. L'Daldo-Ortiz
Councilor Antoinette G. Principe-Castrodes
Councilor J. Melchor B. Quitain Jr.
Councilor Alberto T. Ungab
Councilor Mary Joselle D. Villafuerte
Councilor Jesus Joseph P. Zuzobrado III

ABSENT:
Vice Mayor Sebastian Z. Duterte
- On Official Business
Councilor Jonard C. Dayap

ORDINANCE NO. 0546-21
Series of 2021

AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING THE DAVAO CITY INVENTIONS AND INNOVATIONS CENTER, DEFINING ITS POWERS AND FUNCTIONS, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

--- [Page 2] ---
Page 2 of 6
Ord. No. 0546-21

Be it ordained by the Honorable Sangguniang Panlungsod of Davao City, in session assembled, that:

SECTION 1. TITLE - This Ordinance shall be known as "This Ordinance shall be known as 'Davao City Inventions and Innovations Center'".

SECTION 2. DECLARATION OF PRINCIPLES

1. Republic Act No. 7459, Series of 1992, otherwise known as the "Investors and Inventions Incentives Act of the Philippines", declared to be the national policy to give priority to invention and its utilization on the country's productive systems and national life; and to this end provide incentives to investors and protect their exclusive right to their invention, particularly when the invention is beneficial to the people and contributes to national development and progress.

2. Republic Act No. 11293, Series of 2019, otherwise known as the "Philippine Innovation Act", a policy to foster innovation as a vital component of national development and sustainable economic growth.

3. Republic Act No. 11337, Series of 2019, or an Act Providing Benefits and Programs to Strengthen, Promote and Develop the Philippine Startup Ecosystem, otherwise known as the "Innovative Startup Act", fosters inclusive growth through an innovative economy by streamlining government and non-government initiatives, in both local and international spheres, to create new jobs and opportunities, improve production, and advance innovation and trade in the country.

4. Republic Act No. 10055, Series of 2009, otherwise known as "Philippine Technology Transfer Act of 2009", gives priority to research and development, invention, innovation, and their utilization. It shall also encourage the widest and most systematic participation of all stakeholders in policy-making related to science, technology, and innovation for the general public and the utilization of intellectual property, especially for the benefit of the general public.

5. Republic Act No. 7368, Series of 1992, otherwise known as "Countryside Industrialization Act of 1992", seeks to accelerate through the establishment of manufacturing, processing, and related industries in all towns and cities of the country which add value to domestic resources and farm products, create employment and livelihood opportunities, enhance the well-being of the rural areas, and promote balanced regional development through inter-regional and regional trade and industry linkages, thus sustaining national economic growth.

That the City Government of Davao shall formulate and implement policies and programs for local inventors and innovators to encourage them to promote their inventions and innovations like discovering products, processes, new methods, forms, devices, technologies, services, designs, or other useful measures.

SECTION 3. DEFINITION OF TERMS

a. Inventor - refers to a person who creates or discovers a new method, form, device or other useful means that becomes known as an invention;

b. Investor - people who fund startups and inventors. There are three types of investors:

--- [Page 3] ---
Page 3 of 6
Ord. No. 0546-21
a. Shoe String Investors - usually inventor/s themselves who pool up the least amount of money to prove their idea and get it protected through intellectual property rights;
b. Angel Investors - average people that has money to invest and expertise to share who wants to be involved in the thrill and rewards of a startup business;
c. Venture Capitalists - seasoned investors that provide huge amounts of capital to fund a business;
c. Innovation - refers to the creation of new ideas that results to the development of new or improved products, processes, or services which are then spread or transferred across the market;
d. Innovative product - refers to a good or service that is new or significantly improved, such as improvements in technical specifications, component materials, software in the product, user friendliness or other functional characteristics;
e. Innovator - refers to someone who introduces changes and new ideas;
f. Patent - a government-issued grant of exclusive right to an inventor that exclude others from making, using, or selling the product of his invention during the life of the patent;
g. Startup - refers to a person or registered entity in the Philippines which aims to develop an innovative product, process, or business model;
h. Startup enabler - persons or organizations that help startups launch their business by providing assets, services, such as startup accelerators (provides funding, training, and mentoring), and incubators (provides start-up hosting, mentoring, and co-working space);
i. Business Incubators - facilities that provide working spaces and mentorship for startups during the development and actualization of their innovation ideas;
j. Creative Researchers - people that develop new ways to conduct research;
k. Intellectual Property Rights - the assignment of property rights through patent, copyright, and trademark;
l. Technology platforms - it is a virtual venue that acts as a hub where service providers and potential customers meet. This could be a mobile application or a website where service providers can showcase their products and services; this is also where potential customers search for solutions to their needs. Example: A seller can post his/her skin care products in Shopee (a technology platform), which enables potential customers looking for skin care products to access it;

--- [Page 4] ---
Page 4 of 6
Ord. No. 0546-21

m. Technology entrepreneurs - people who launch business ventures which require a technical expert or specialist in the team to develop a technology to enhance a business process or create new product. Example: Steve Jobs was the technology entrepreneur who co-founded Apple with Steve Wozniak, software engineer/expert who developed the machine.

SECTION 4. THE CREATION OF DAVAO CITY INVENTIONS AND INNOVATIONS CENTER

To create a venue for Davao City based inventors, innovators, and creative researchers to come together in a unified and collective effort, so that their ideas, innovations, and inventions can be fully developed, promoted, and qualified for the purpose of Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) application of innovative products and services.

The Center shall function as "Startup Enabler" (as defined under R.A. No. 11337) to provide technical expertise in the areas of prototype building, feasibility and financial analysis, drafting of project proposals for funding, and intellectual property rights of patent assistance, applications and protection, among others.

The center shall promote (i.e., internet, radio/TV broadcast, etc.) and showcase the fully developed innovative product(s), and create networks and linkages not only among inventors and innovators but also with financing institutions, investors, and the market.

The center shall also have a capacity building program for inventors, innovators and startup entrepreneurs through trainings and mentoring in collaboration with the Department of Science and Technology (DOST) and the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI).

SECTION 5. CREATION OF DAVAO CITY INVENTIONS AND INNOVATIONS COUNCIL

There is hereby created a Davao City Inventions and Innovations Council which shall have the primary function of setting policies and directions of the Davao City Inventions and Innovations Center.

The Council shall supervise the implementation of the policies, programs, and directions; and to secure and appropriate the annual budget of the Davao City Inventions and Innovations Center.

The Council shall recommend staffing and budget for the Center.

SECTION 6. COMPOSITION OF THE DAVAO CITY INVENTIONS AND INNOVATIONS COUNCIL

Chairperson - City Mayor
Vice Chairperson - Chairperson, SP Committee on Education, Science and Technology, Arts and Culture

Members:
- Chairperson, SP Committee on Trade and Industry
- City Planning & Development Office
- Davao Investment and Promotion Center
- Department of Science and Technology (DOST) (1) Representative
- Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) (1) Representative
- Davao City Chamber of Commerce and Industry Inc. (1) Representative

--- [Page 5] ---
Page 5 of 6
Ord. No. 0546-21

- Philippine Information Agency (1) Representative
- Davao Inventors Group (1) Representative
- Business Incubators-Public Academic Institute (1) Representative
- Business Incubators (2) Representatives

SECTION 7. FUNCTIONS OF THE COUNCIL
1. To promote an innovative and creative ecosystem for the constituents of Davao City.
2. To harness and develop innovative and creative ideas.
3. To support and encourage Davao City inventors, innovators, startups, and creative researchers to develop globally competitive products and services.
4. To promote and synergize networks and linkages among researchers, product developers, government agencies, communities, industries, funding institutions, and commerce.
5. To support and nurture the growth of innovative individuals who are engaged in value-added and low, medium, and high-technology related activities, from design and development to commercialization.
6. To boost the manufacturing, creative research, and development industries of Davao City by protecting and commercializing the outputs of inventors, innovators, and creative researchers.
7. To protect and to promote all the outputs of inventors, innovators, startups, and creative researchers.
8. To assist in the patent application of local inventors and innovators.
9. To promote Davao City as a hub for innovation, science, and technology.

SECTION 8. GRANTS - The Council may accept grants for the support of local inventors and innovators subject to accounting rules and regulations.
The Council shall ensure an annual budget for the implementation of this Ordinance.

SECTION 9. ANNUAL CITY INVENTORS FAIR DURING THE MONTH OF APRIL - The Council shall initiate an annual fair or exhibit showcasing the products of local inventors and shall designate the month of April every year as the Davao City Inventors Month in cooperation with the Department of Science and Technology (DOST), Department of Trade and Industry (DTI), and the Department of Information and Communications Technology (DICT).

SECTION 10. BUDGET - The City shall appropriate Ten Million Pesos ($10 million) for the first year of operation of the Davao City Inventions and Innovations Center and subsequent annual budget subject to accounting rules and regulations.

SECTION 11. REPEALING CLAUSE - All other laws, decrees, orders, issuances, rules, and regulations which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed, amended, or modified accordingly.

--- [Page 6] ---
Page 6 of 6
Ord. No. 0546-21

SECTION 12. SEPARABILITY CLAUSE - If, for any reason, any provision of this Ordinance, or any part thereof, is declared invalid or unconstitutional, all other sections or provisions not affected thereby shall remain in force and effect.

SECTION 13. EFFECTIVITY - This Ordinance shall take effect fifteen (15) days after publication.

ENACTED, on the 20th day of April 2021, by an unanimous vote of all the Members of the Sanggunian, there being a quorum.

CERTIFIED CORRECT:
CHARITO N. SANTOS
Secretary to the Sangguniang Panlungsod
(City Government Department Head II)

ATTESTED:

DANILO C. DAYANGHIRANG
City Councilor
Temporary Presiding Officer
cns/kjtq

APPROVED: MAY 7 2021, 2021

SARA Z. DUTERTE
City Mayor

ATTESTED:

ATTY. JULEIKA T. LOPEZ
City Administrator
