=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 000707-73 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
Republic of the Philippines
CITY OF DAVAO
Office of the City Council
November 7, 1973
The Honorable City Mayor
City of Davao
S i r :
In pursuance of Paragraph 2, Section 15, of Republic Act No. 4354, otherwise known as the Revised Charter of the City of Davao,
I have the honor to forward herewith Resolution No. 995 and Ordinance No. 707, current series, of the City Council of Davao, for appropriate action.
Very truly yours,
CONRADO ESTUART
Assistant Secretary of the Council
on Legal and Legislative Matters
Enclosures:
As stated.
1/5
11-04
RECEIVED
7 NOV 1973
Respectfully returned to the Honorable City Council, City of Davao, approved.
D. M. P. M. R. M. P.

--- [Page 2] ---
5th City Council of Davao
78th Regular Session
Series of 1973
Republic of the Philippines
CITY OF DAVAO
Office of the City Council
"50"
ORDER NO. 701
AN ORDER CHARTING THE DAVAO CITY WATER DISTRICT PURSUANT TO THE PROVISIONS OF PRESIDENTIAL DECREE NO. 196, ORIGINALLY KNOWN AS THE "PROVINCIAL UTILITIES ACT OF 1972" AND PROVIDING FOR THE CONSTRUCTION AND ADMINISTRATION OF SUCH DISTRICTS AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES."
No. 10 Ordered by the City Council, City of Davao, that:
SECTION 1. - There is hereby created and formed the Davao City Water District.
SECTION 2. - The Davao City Water District shall be composed of the territory of the City of Davao as fixed in Sec. 2, Article I, of Republic Act 4354, otherwise known as "The Revised Charter of the City of Davao".
SECTION 3. - The Davao City Water District is formed for the purposes of:
a) Acquiring, installing, improving, maintaining and operating water supply and distribution systems for domestic, industrial, municipal and agricultural uses for residents and lands within the boundaries of said district;
b) Providing, maintaining and operating waste-water collection, treatment and disposal facilities;
and
c) Conducting such other functions and operations incidental to water resource development, utilization and disposal within said district, as may necessary or incidental to said purpose.
SECTION 4. - All rights, interest of the City of Davao to the existing water and/or sewerage facilities particularly the Davao Metropolitan Waterworks System including its personnel are hereby transferred to the Davao City Water District pursuant to

--- [Page 3] ---
-2-
Ordinance No. 707, series of 1973, continued.
Sec. II(b) of Presidential Decree No. 198, provided that in lieu of the taxes on the said Banaue City Water District, the latter should pay to the City of Banaue an annual amount of three percent (3%) of its gross receipts from water sales every year.
SECTION 5.—There shall be a Board of Directors of the Banaue City Water District to be composed of five (5) Filipino citizens who are of voting age and are residents of Banaue City pursuant to the provisions of Sections 3, 9, 10 and 11 of Presidential Decree No. 198 and shall possess the qualifications provided therewith provided, however, that in no case shall a Director be an elective official of the government. In case of vacancies in the positions of Board of Directors, the provision of Sec. 12 of Presidential Decree No. 198 shall govern.
The following are the initial members of the Board of Directors:
a) Mr. Adolfo Angara, representing business, commercial or financial institutions whose term shall expire on December 31, 1974;
b) Rev. Fr. Ben Basilio, S. J., representing educational and religious institutions whose term shall expire on December 31, 1974;
c) Engr. Vicente G. Garvel, representing professional organizations, whose term shall expire on December 31, 1976;
d) Atty. Eugenio N. Gali, representing women's organizations, whose term shall expire on December 31, 1976;
e) Dr. Alex Punamalima, representing Civil-oriented clubs, whose term shall expire on December 31, 1976.
Continued on Page -2-

--- [Page 4] ---
-3-
Ordinance No. 707, series of 1973, continued.

SECTION 6. - The Bays City Water District shall only be dissolved on the grounds and under the conditions set forth in Sec. 44 of Presidential Revenue No. 198, i. e., by a resolution of the Board of Directors filed in the manner of filing a resolution forming the district, provided, however, to the adoption of any such resolution:
a) Another public entity has acquired the assets of the district and has assumed all obligations and liabilities attached thereto;
b) All bondholders have been notified and they consent to said transfer and dissolution;
c) A court of competent jurisdiction has found that said transfer and dissolution are in the best interest of the public.
SECTION 7. - The Bays City Water District shall have the following powers, rights and obligations as provided for in Section 56 of Presidential Revenue No. 198, i. e., to borrow money to raise funds to pay all costs of any public improvements authorized by Title II of Presidential Revenue No. 198 and any income revenue bonds to evidence the indebtedness created by such borrowing. Such revenue bonds shall constitute special assessments and evidence of special indebtedness of the district and shall be a charge upon, and payable, as to the principal thereof, any part thereof, solely from such revenues and funds as are specified therein in the proceedings for their issuance. Said bonds may be issued pursuant to the following provisions:
a) Estimates of Revenue. - If a revenue bond issue is contemplated, the board of the district shall adopt by resolution a plan describing the works to be Continued on Page 46

--- [Page 5] ---
- 4 -
Statutes No. 707, series of 1973, continued.
required or constructed together with an estimate of all costs thereof, including payment of interest on any bonds of the district, which will become payable or acquisition of such works, for which the general funds of the district then in the treasury are inade-
quate.
b) Issuance in the District Bond Limitation of Obligations. - Revenue bonds shall be issued in the name of the district, and shall be obligations of the district limited, to the payment or redemption of the revenue bonds and the payment of interest thereon from the revenues of the district.
a) Call, Prior and Redemption. - The Board, by resolution authorizing the issuance of revenue bonds, shall fix the method of giving notice of redemption. Such bonds shall be issued subject to call and redemption prior to maturity and a statement to that effect shall appear on the face of the revenue bonds. Each bond shall be subject to call or redemption prior to its fixed maturity date unless it contains such notice.
4) Terms of Bonds. - The face of revenue bonds shall contain a statement that: (1) the payment or redemption of the bond and payment of interest thereon is secured solely by a first and direct charge and lien upon all of the revenues received from the sale of voter, (2) neither the payment of all or any part of the principal debt, liability or obligation of the district, and (3) the bond is subject to call and redemption prior to maturity, if the bond so provides. Each issue of revenue bonds shall be concluded.

--- [Page 6] ---
-5-
Subp. 77, sec. of 1977, continued.
consecutively from lower to higher as they mature
and shall bear each date as may be presented by
the board. The date appearing the date of issuance
irrespective of subsequent delivery of the bond.
Each bond shall be signed by the chairman and
attested by the secretary provided that interest
comprises thereon may be signed by the
secretary only. The seal of the district shall be
affixed to each revenue bond.
e) Payment of Interest. - Revenue bonds shall
be paid in cash and in full at such time and place
as may be designated by the board and shown on the
face of each bond, but in no case shall the maturity
of any bond be more than 40 years from its date.
f) Default. - In the event of default by the
district in the payment of principal or interest on
its outstanding revenue bonds, any bondholder shall
have the power to bring an action in any court of com-
petent jurisdiction to compel the payment of said
amount, and in connection therewith, to require the
apprehension of a receiver of the property and opera-
tions of the district and to assume full jurisdiction
over all affairs including the power to issue revenue
notes, if necessary, until such time as the default is cured.
SECTION 6. - The Revenue City Water District shall exercise
all other powers as are conferred to it by the provisions of
Presidential Revenue No. 198.
SECTION 7. - Each Director of the Revenue City Water District shall receive a compensation in an amount for each meeting of the
Board actually attended by him equivalent to one percent of the
Sumtotal of Revenues.

--- [Page 7] ---
Ordinance No. 707, series of 1971, continued.

Royer's monthly salary provided, however, that no director shall receive other compensation for services to the district;

SECTION 10. - The City of Roanoke shall subsidize the Roanoke City Water District the sum of THIRTY THOUSAND ($30,000.00) FEDCS monthly for a period of twenty-four (24) months, effective November 1, 1975, for its operation and maintenance including the payment of the salaries and/or wages, life, retirement premiums, medicare, leave credits and retirement benefits of the personnel of the Roanoke Metropolitan Waterworks System who are thereunto transferred.

SECTION 11. - The sum of ONE HUNDRED SIXTY THOUSAND ($160,000.00) FEDCS, in hereby appropriated out of

a) The unexpended balance as of October 29, 1975, in the re-estimated Budget and Financials of the Roanoke Metropolitan Waterworks System for the current fiscal year, in the amount of $126,259.32 by revenue; and

b) The estimated income of the City Government for the current fiscal year in the amount of $35,750.68, the same to be nonappropriated and made available as subsidy to the Roanoke City Water District for its operation and maintenance including the payment of the salaries and/or wages, life, retirement premiums, medicare, leave credits and retirement benefits of the personnel of the Roanoke Metropolitan Waterworks System who are transferred to the said Roanoke City Water District covering the period from November 1, 1975 to June 30, 1974;

SECTION 12. - This Ordinance shall take effect upon approval.

DATED: October 25, 1971.

--- [Page 8] ---
-7-
Exhibits No. 707, series of 1975, continued.
RICHARD R. BROWN
Supervisor TANNO
President Fire Department
Acting Presiding Officer
ATTORNEY:
YAN J. KUZELLA
Acting Secretary of the Council
12/26/75
APPROVED:
LUD T. RANKS
Mayor, City of Denver
ATTORNEY:
(3a) RICHARD R. BELSON, JR.
Acting City Secretary
