=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 0816-21 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
Republic of the Philippines
City of Davao
Office of the Sangguniang Panlungsod

19th City Council
45th Regular Session
Series of 2021

PRESENT:

Councillor Edgar P. Ibayan Jr.
Councillor Ralph O. Abella
Councillor Nilo D. Abelerra
Councillor Bai Hundra Cassandra Dominique N. Advincula
Councillor Wilberto E. Al-ag
Councillor Dante L. Apostol Sr.
Councillor Conrado C. Baluran
Councillor Jessica M. Bonguyan
Councillor Josue John J. Bonguyan
Councillor Philip R. Braga
Councillor Augusto Javier G. Campos III
Councillor Danilo C. Dayanghirang
Councillor Jonard C. Dayap
Councillor Edgar R. Ibayan Sr.
Councillor Pamela A. Librado-Morata
Councillor Diosdado Angelo Junior R. Mahipus
Councillor Alfaff U. Marahonski
Councillor Michael G. L. Martiz
Councillor Antoinette G. Principe-Castrodes
Councillor J. Melchor B. Quitaan Jr.
Councillor Alberto T. Ungab
Councillor Mary Joselle D. Villafuerte
Councillor Jesus Joseph P. Zozobra III

ABSENT:

Vice Mayor Sebastian Z. Duterte
Councillor Maria Belen S. Acosta
- On Official Business
- OB - Attended the Year End Evaluation and oath taking Ceremony of Talomo B District Women's Federation
- On Maternity Leave
- On Sick Leave

Councillor Richlyn N. Justol-Baguilod
Councillor Bonifacio E. Militar

ORDINANCE NO. 0816-21
Series of 2021

AN ORDINANCE MODERNIZING AND STRENGTHENING THE DAVAO CITY LIBRARY AND INFORMATION CENTER

--- [Page 2] ---
Page 2 of 8
Ord. No. 0816-21

Be it ordained by the Honorable Sangguniang Panlungsod of Davao City, in session assembled, that:

SECTION 1. TITLE. -- This Ordinance shall be known as the "DAVAO CITY LIBRARY AND INFORMATION CENTER ORDINANCE".

SECTION 2. DECLARATION OF PRINCIPLES

1. Republic Act No. 7743 declares as national policy to promote the moral and intellectual well-being of the people: elevate the literacy level of every Filipino to the end that illiteracy is eradicated by the end of the century; and recognize the vital role of knowledge and information in nation-building by establishing public libraries over the entire country. The government is committed to upgrade, update and modernize its library in keeping with the times.

2. Republic Act No. 9246, Series of 2003 entitled "An Act Modernizing the Practice of Librarianship in the Philippines Thereby Repealing Republic Act No. 6966, entitled "An Act Regulating the Practice of Librarianship and Prescribing the Qualifications of Librarians Appropriating Funds Therfor and for Other Purposes Concerning Knowledge." The said Act (the "Modernization Act of 2003") declares that the State recognizes the essential role of the librarian as a profession in developing the intellectual capacity of the citizenry, thus, making library service a regular component for national development.

SECTION 3. DEFINITION OF TERMS. -- For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following terms shall be understood hereinafter to mean as:

a. Archives -- shall refer to periodicals, books and other items, articles or materials, whether in form of electronic, audio-visual or print which by their nature and characteristics have enduring values, that have been selected for permanent preservation;

b. City Library -- a public library located, established, maintained, and supported by the city government and primarily for the use of the residents of the city;

c. Librarian -- refers to an individual who is a bona fide holder of a Certificate of Registration and Professional Identification Card issued by the Professional Regulatory Board for Librarians and by the Professional Regulation Commission in accordance with Republic Act No. 9246;

d. Librarianship -- refers to the performance of the librarian's functions, which shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

d.1. Selection and acquisition of multi-media sources of information which would best respond to clientele's need for adequate, relevant and timely information;

d.2. Cataloguing and classification of knowledge or sources of information into relevant organized collections and creation of local databases for speedy access, retrieval or delivery of information;

--- [Page 3] ---
Page 3 of 8
Ord. No. 0816-21

d.3. Development of computer-assisted/computer-backed information systems which would permit online and network services;
d.4. Establishment of library systems and procedures; dissemination of information; rendering of information, reference and research assistance; archiving, and education of users;
d.5. Teaching, lecturing and reviewing of library, archives and information science subjects, including subjects given in the licensure examination;
d.6. Rendering of services involving technical knowledge/expertise in abstracting, indexing, cataloguing and classifying, or the preparation of bibliographies, subject authority lists, thesauri and union catalogues/lists;
d.7. Preparation, evaluation or appraisal of plans, programs and/or projects for the establishment, organization, development and growth of libraries or information centers, and the determination of library requirements for space, buildings, structures or facilities;
d.8. Provision of professional and consultancy services or advice on any aspect of librarianship; and
d.9. Organization, conservation, preservation and restoration of historical and cultural documents and other intellectual properties.

SECTION 4. THE MISSION OF THE LIBRARY.
1. The library is a place for the preservation of knowledge, culture, art, history - a connection to our collective intellectual past. If the church is the symbol of religion, libraries are a symbol of learning.
2. The library is not just a mere repository of books - it is an important government edifice housed in a building that possesses both dignity of appearance and convenience of location, safety and comfort, beautiful and functional space.
3. The library exists to serve the community (children, men and women, young and old, rich and poor) without discrimination, where one can study or do research and at the same time enjoy its offerings and ambience.

SECTION 5. THE PURPOSE OF THE CITY LIBRARY.
1. The City Library is a public library established, maintained and supported by the city government primarily for the use of the residents of the City.
2. The City Library is a public library for the purpose of providing resources and services using a variety of media to meet the needs of individuals or groups for education, information and personal development including recreation and leisure.
3. The City Library shall strive to meet the needs of all groups in the community regardless of age and physical, economic or social circumstances with special responsibility to meet the needs of children and young people.

--- [Page 4] ---
Page 4 of 8
Ord. No. 0816-21
4. The City Library shall serve as the center of information making all kinds of information and knowledge readily available to its users.
5. The City Library shall help shape, promote, and support the cultural identity of the City.
6. The City Library shall strive to utilize modern technology to better serve its users for education and information purposes.
SECTION 6. LOGO/SEAL
Davao City Library and Information Center recognized the need to have a logo/seal that will represent the aspirations of the Davao City Library and Information Center.
The Davao City Library logo/seal is likewise necessary to identify official transactions and documents of the library.
There is a need for a representation of a simple, legible, and modern seal to complement the modernization and rebranding of the new City Library services and facilities.
As per Resolution No. 002, Series of 2021, of the Davao City Library Board it approved the official seal or logo of the Davao City Library and Information Center, as shown below:
[Image of the logo/seal]
The icons on the seal shall represent the following:
1. Row of Book Spine – represents literacy and learning, the main thrust of the library, the pillars/spines also represent learning and strength as the libraries build neighbors and communities.
2. Mt. Apo – represents the wisdom and knowledge as Apo etymology means "revered elder." Like the revered elders, the library is the repository and source of wisdom and knowledge for the different generations of Davaeños;
3. Silhouette of Mt. Apo – represents the library user's learning curve of the cycle of learning or inner elevation and represents out cycle of learning and symbolizes the mission of the library to foster learning and promote literacy.
4. The color blue is known for its trust and dependability and symbolizes the responsibility and dependability of the library to provide information towards producing a more inspired, empowered, and connected diverse community.

--- [Page 5] ---
Page 5 of 8
Ord. No. 0816-21

SECTION 6. ROLE OF THE DAVAO CITY LIBRARY AND INFORMATION CENTER - In accordance with the Revised Standards for Philippine Public Libraries, the following are the functions of the Davao City Library and Information Center:

1. Administration
a. Administratively, the library shall operate under the administrative supervision of the local government and under technical expertise of the National Library of the Philippines (NLP);
b. The library shall be under the immediate supervision of the City Mayor;
c. The library shall be managed by a full-time qualified librarian supported by the needed number of staff for its efficient operation;
d. The library shall be subject to the policies and guidelines of the Davao City Library Board headed by the City Mayor;

2. Collection Management
a. The collections shall be based on the objective of the library and the needs of the community it serves;
b. The library shall maintain a collection of local history, culture, and arts;
c. The collection shall include materials in all formats and shall be organized according to existing standards;
d. The overall collections should also be updated and upgraded to conform to modern technology;
e. The Chief Librarian shall prepare an annual collection development plan and annual budget to be presented to the Library Board;
f. There shall be a minimum collection of three thousand (3,000) volumes and a provision of at least five percent (5%) annual increase of the collection required;
g. The library shall provide amenities such as audio-visual facilities, activity center, cafe (access to food), urban gardening (at the roof top) and others.

3. Services and Utilization
a. The library shall provide services with the highest degree of efficiency and integrity;
b. The library shall practice open-shelf system;
c. The library shall have a website to promote its services and activities;
d. The library shall provide resources for wholesome development of the community, without any discrimination;
e. The library must have a children's corner, where children could obtain information through reading books, focused and unobstructed from other readers, teachers, etc., and where educational enhancement activities can be held;
f. The library shall observe service hours for the maximum benefit of its clients;
g. Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses (MOOE) shall include, among others, funds for capability trainings, seminars, conference, etc., subscriptions and others;
h. Capital outlay to include funds to purchase library resources, equipment, furniture and others.

--- [Page 6] ---
Page 6 of 8
Ord. No. 0816-21

4. Linkages, Networking and Collaboration
a. The library shall engage in networking, resource sharing, and other forms of partnership relevant to its mandate;
b. The library shall pursue continuing library education and membership to professional associations to further enhance learning;
c. The library shall serve as a social hub for its partners to promote goodwill between government and the community (public or private);
d. The library shall help organize Barangay Reading Centers in all barangays in coordination with the Barangay Council, based on Republic Act No. 7743.

5. Information Technology Facilities and Services
a. The library shall provide WiFi connectivity and other facilities for information technology and communication services.

SECTION 7. CREATION OF THE LOCAL LIBRARY BOARD
In accordance with Republic Act 7743 and in consonance with Executive Order 55, Series of 2019, of Davao City, the Davao City Local Library Board is hereby created and organized which will act as an advisory body and policy-setting authority in fulfilling the mandate of delivering quality service, providing stability, and continuing its services to the community.

SECTION 8. COMPOSITION OF THE BOARD
The composition of the Davao City Library Board as mandated by Executive Order 55, Series of 2019, are as follows:

Chairperson - City Mayor
Vice-Chairperson - School Division Superintendent
Members - Chairperson, SP Committee on Education
- City Treasurer
- City Budget Officer
- Representative, Sangguniang Kabataan
- Chairperson, Phil. Librarian Association Davao Chapter

The Chairperson, the Vice-Chairperson, and the members of the Library Board shall perform their duties as such without compensation or remuneration. Members thereof who are not government officials or employees shall be entitled to necessary traveling expenses and allowance which are chargeable against the funds of the Local Library Board subject to existing accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

SECTION 9. FUNCTIONS OF THE BOARD
The Local Library Board shall have the following functions:
1. Shall be the policy-making body of the Davao City Library and Information Center (DCLIC);
2. Shall recommend appropriate budget for the maintenance of the library for it to be able to effectively implement its mandate;
3. Shall find ways and means in increasing the book and non-book collection of the library and improving the facilities of the library;
4. Shall act as bridge and advocate between the library and community;

--- [Page 7] ---
Page 7 of 8
Ord. No. 0816-21
5. Shall establish partnership and linkages with educational institutions, public and private organizations that support library programs and services;
6. Shall do other functions that are necessary for the implementation of this Ordinance.
SECTION 10. SITE. — The establishment of the City Library and Information Center shall be an integral part of the development plan of the City Government of Davao and its permanent site shall be at C. Bangoy Street, Barangay 34-D, Poblacion District, this City.
SECTION 11. APPROPRIATIONS. — The amount necessary to carry out the provisions of this Ordinance shall be included in the Annual City Budget and subsequent Supplementary Budget of the year following its enactment into law.
SECTION 12. SUBMISSION OF REPORTS. — Within ninety (90) days from the approval of this Ordinance, and at the end of every calendar year thereafter, the Davao City Librarian through the Local Library Board shall submit its progress report on the implementation of this Ordinance, to the City Mayor.
SECTION 13. REPEALING CLAUSE. — All acts, presidential decrees, executive orders and issuances inconsistent with this Ordinance are hereby repealed or amended accordingly.
SECTION 14. SEPARABILITY CLAUSE. — If any provision of this Ordinance is declared unconstitutional or inoperative, the other provisions not so declared shall remain in force and effect.
SECTION 15. EFFECTIVITY. — This Ordinance shall take effect fifteen (15) days after publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Davao.
ENACTED, on the 2nd day of November 2021, by a unanimous vote of all the Members of the Sanggunian, there being a quorum.
CERTIFIED CORRECT:
CHIQUITO N. SANTOS
Secretary to the Sanggunian Panlungsod
(City Government Department Head II)
ATTESTED:
EDGAR P. IBUYAN JR.
President Fro Tempore
Temporary Presiding Officer
cns/kjtq

--- [Page 8] ---
Page 8 of 8
Ord.No. 0816-21
APPROVED: JAN 25 2022, 2021
SARA Z. DUTERTE
City Mayor
ATTESTED:
ATTY. ZULEIKA T. LOPEZ
City Administrator
AN ORDINANCE MODERNIZING AND STRENGTHENING THE DAVAO CITY LIBRARY AND INFORMATION CENTER
