=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 0998-22 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
Republic of the Philippines
City of Davao
Office of the Sangguniang Panlungsod

19th City Council
24th Regular Session
Series of 2022

PRESENT:
Councillor Edgar P. Ibayun Jr.
Councillor Ralph O. Abella
Councillor Nilo D. Abellera
Councillor Luna Maria Dominique N. Advincula
Councillor Bai Hundra Cassandra Dominique N. Advincula
Councillor Wilberto E. Al-ag
Councillor Dante A. Apostol Sr.
Councillor Rodrigo B. Baluran
Councillor Joaquin M. Bonguyan
Councillor Lucio Jovito Bonguyan
Councillor Pilar C. Braga
Councillor Augusto Javier G. Campos III
Councillor Danilo C. Dayanghirang
Councillor Jonard C. Dayap
Councillor Edgar R. Ibayun Sr.
Councillor Richlyn N. Judith Baquilod
Councillor Diosdado Angelino Madido-Morata
Councillor Diosdado Angelo Junior R. Mahipus
Councillor Rodolfo M. Mande
Councillor Jaffar U. Marohomsalic
Councillor Myrna G. D'Alado-Ortiz
Councillor Antoinette G. Principe-Castrodes
Councillor J. Melchor B. Quitain Jr.
Councillor Mary Josefa D. Villafuerte
Councillor Jesus Joseph P. Zozobraide III

ABSENT:
Vice Mayor Sebastian Z. Duterte
Councillor Bonifacio E. Militar

ORDINANCE NO. 0998-22
Series of 2022

AN ORDINANCE INSTITUTIONALIZING THE DAVAO CITY ENHANCED COMPREHENSIVE LOCAL INTEGRATION PROGRAM (E-CLIP) FOR FORMER REBELS OR FORMER VIOLENT EXTREMISTS IN DAVAO CITY AND OTHER PERTinent PROGRAMS AND SERVICES AS PROVIDED BY THE HALFWAY HOUSE KALINAW VILLAGE

--- [Page 2] ---
Page 2 of 21
Ord. No. 0998-22

Be it ordained by the Honorable Sangguniang Panlungsod of Davao City, in session assembled, that:

CHAPTER I

SECTION 1. TITLE - This Ordinance shall be known as the "ORDINANCE INSTITUTIONALIZING THE DAVAO CITY ENHANCED COMPREHENSIVE LOCAL INTEGRATION PROGRAM (E-CLIP) FOR FORMER REBELS (FRs) AND FORMER VIOLENT EXTREMISTS (FVEs) IN DAVAO CITY AND OTHER PERTINENT PROGRAMS AND SERVICES AS PROVIDED BY THE HALFWAY HOUSE KALINAW VILLAGE (KALINAW VILLAGE FOR BREVITY)".

SECTION 2. DECLARATION OF POLICY - Local Government Units (LGUs) are empowered with the promotion and maintenance of peace and order and the preservation of public safety. Specifically, Section 17 (B) (3) (v) of the Local Government Code of 1991 mandates LGUs to provide basic services and facilities for FRs and FVEs, which include programs and projects, and population development services for FRs and FVEs;

To further accelerate the sound development of Davao City in accordance with the Davao City Enhanced Comprehensive Local Integration Program (E-CLIP) for FRs and FVEs in Davao City and other pertinent programs and services as provided by the Kalinaw Village.

SECTION 3. PURPOSES - Specifically, this Ordinance aims to:

a. Provide comprehensive guidelines and clear process in the implementation of E-CLIP in Davao City. Also, to stipulate the Kalinaw Village Operations Manual as the halfway house, being managed and maintained by the City Government, which serves as a venue for various interventions needed to be undertaken by FRs and FVEs in preparation for their mainstreaming and in general serves as a governance reform strategy in Davao City;

b. Stipulate procedure to methodically collect, store, track, manage, interpret, and utilize data of FRs, FVEs, and receiving unit given the localized, customized, efficient, collaborative and holistic approach through the E-CLIP Information System (E-CLIP IS), thereby decreasing the processing time in the release of assistance and the reintegration of FRs and FVEs to their communities as stipulated in Department of Interior and Local Government (DILG) Memorandum Circular No. 01, Series of 2021 (JMC 01, Series of 2021, for brevity) entitled "Implementing Guidelines on the Provision of DILG-administered Package of Assistance for FRs and FVEs under the E-CLIP";

c. Define the specific roles and responsibilities of all partners and stakeholders for the effective and efficient implementation of the program in Davao City such as, but not limited to, the Davao City E-CLIP Committee, City Social Welfare and Development Office, Kalinaw Village, Joint Armed Forces of the Philippines and Philippine National Police Intelligence Committee (JAPIC), Barangay Officials, Davao City Peace and Order Council, Civil Society Organizations and FRs and FVEs.

--- [Page 3] ---
**Page 3 of 22**

**Ord. No. 0998-22**

**CHAPTER II**

**SCOPE/COVERAGE**

**SECTION 4. AREA OF COVERAGE** - This Ordinance and all policies herein shall cover all regular CPP-NPA-NDF, Militia ng Bayan, Abu Sayyaf Group, Maute Group, Davao Islaiyu, Bangsamoro, Islamic Freedom Fighter and Turalfe Group, referred to as FRs and FVEs, whose former units operated in Davao City, who are themselves residents of Davao City or those who surrendered in Davao City.

**CHAPTER III**

**E-CLIP COMMITTEE AND KALINAW VILLAGE ADMINISTRATION**

**SECTION 5. IMPLEMENTORS** - To implement the provisions of this Ordinance, there shall be:

a. Davao City E-CLIP Committee;

b. E-CLIP Secretariat and Technical Working Group; and

c. Halfway House Kalinaw Village Management and Administration

**SECTION 6. COMPOSITION OF THE E-CLIP COMMITTEE** - The Davao City E-CLIP Committee shall be composed of the following or the respective heads of the following offices, to wit:

Chairperson – Davao City Mayor

Co-Chairperson – Commanding Officer, Philippine Army having jurisdiction of Davao City

Members:

- City Administrator

- City Social Welfare and Development Office (CSWDO)

- Davao City Peace 911

- Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG)

- Davao City Police Office (DCPO)

- Commission on Good Government and Order of the City Council

- Committee on Civil, Political and Human Rights

- Liga ng mga Barangay

- Representative from each of the following organizations:

  o Representative from Civil Society Organization (CSO)

  o Davao City Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Inc. (DCCIII)

  o Representative from FRs and FVEs

  o The Media Sector

6a. The City Mayor, as Chair of the City E-CLIP Committee, shall identify and appoint the qualified representatives from the Media Sector and CSO who must be a member of the Davao City Peace and Order Council.

6b. The E-CLIP Committee shall set appropriate parameters for the FRs and FVEs and unanimously vote and approve in terms of the representation of the FRs and FVEs in the E-CLIP Committee.

--- [Page 4] ---
**Page 4 of 22**

**Ord. No. 0998-22**

**SECTION 7. COMPOSITION OF THE HALFWAY HOUSE KALINAW VILLAGE**

7a. The Kalinaw Village for FRSs and FVEs is under the administration of the City Mayor as the E-CLIP Committee Chairperson, through the direct management of CSWDQ who shall supervise the operations and the plans being employed.

7b. The Kalinaw Village shall have a CSWDQ appointed Center Manager. Under the Kalinaw Village Center Manager are the following:

a. Administrative Section;

b. Social Services Section;

c. Medical Services Section;

d. Healthcare Services Section.

**SECTION 8. FUNCTIONS OF THE E-CLIP COMMITTEE AND THE KALINAW VILLAGE MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION**

8a. The Davao City E-CLIP Committee shall be responsible for the effective implementation and institutionalization of Davao City's E-CLIP. Specifically, the Davao City E-CLIP Committee is tasked to perform the following functions, to wit:

a. Ensure the convergent effort in the delivery of the identified services of the program including reproduction and dissemination of E-CLIP Information, Education, and Communication (IEC) materials;

b. Ensure proper documentation and referral of the needs of the FRSs and FVEs to appropriate agencies and other partner institutions including profiling of the FRSs and FVEs;

c. Assist the FRSs and FVEs in completing the E-CLIP Enrollment Form. The FRSs and FVEs should either sign or thumb mark the Form after completing it, attested by the DILG Provincial/Highly Urbanized City (HUC) Director or Independent Component City (ICC) Local Government Operations Officers (LGOO) and approved by the Provincial Governor/HUC/JCC Mayor or by their designated officer preferably the City Administrator or CSWDQ;

d. Assist the FRSs and FVEs in the preparation and implementation of their Former Rebel Reintegration Plan (FRRP), Former Violent Extremist Reintegration Plan (FVERP), and Business Plan (Mungkanghing Proyekto) through the City Social Welfare and Development Office (CSWDQ) as a lead office managing the Kalinaw Village to assist the FRSs and FVEs. It shall have the option to come up with its customized template (form) of FRRP/FVERP and Business Plan, provided the minimum datasets reflected in the attached form is complied with;

e. Conduct regular E-CLIP Committee meeting to discuss coordination and monitoring initiatives on E-CLIP implementation in Kalinaw Village, and resolve issues and concerns affecting Kalinaw Village especially in terms of its interventions, programs and services for FRSs and FVEs. The E-CLIP Committee shall meet at least once every quarter with the City or Independent Component City (PHUC/JCC) Peace and Order Council (POC) during its meetings;

--- [Page 5] ---
Page 5 of 21
Ord. No. 0998-22

f. Facilitate the processing of the FRs and FVEs' birth certificates, identification ID cards/documents, registration to the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PHIC) and other necessary documents needed by the partner-stakeholders;

g. Coordinate and report to the Department of Justice (DOJ), through Local/Regional Task Forces to End Local Communist Armed Conflict (LRTFs - ELAC), the FRs and FVEs who will signify to avail the Amnesty Program, subject to existing laws and policies.

8b. The City Government through the Davao City Mayor and the CSWDO shall be responsible for the management and maintenance of Kainaw Village. For ready reference, attached to this Ordinance is the Halfway House Kainaw Village Operations Manual as Annex "A". The said Operations Manual may be revised upon consultation with ECLIP Committee and the CSWDO.

The Kainaw Village Center Manager is responsible for collating reports coming from the different Sections of the Center.

The Kainaw Village Administration shall craft its own policies on the administration of its personnel subject to existing laws, policies, or guidelines of the Civil Service Commission or the City Government. This may include policies and guidelines on leave, termination, hiring, disciplining, work hours, etc.

The Administrative Section is responsible for all the structural, clerical, and secretarial needs of Kainaw Village for FRs and FVEs while the Social Services Section is responsible for employing the programs and assistance for the clientele/residents. The Medical Services Section shall be responsible for the medical and psychological needs of FRs and FVEs. The Homeless Services Section shall be tasked to provide the basic services and needs of FRs and FVEs while in Kainaw Village.

8c. ECLIP Committee and Kainaw Center Manager Reportorial Tasks.

The Kainaw Village Administration is expected to render regular reports to the Davao City ECLIP Committee regarding its operations and the implementation of its programs and services for the FRs and FVEs enrolled.

SECTION 9. SECRETARIAT AND TECHNICAL WORKING GROUP - The City Social Welfare and Development Officer is hereby directed to identify appropriate personnel from its office to constitute as the City ECLIP Committee Secretariat and Technical Working Group. They shall perform all clerical and documentation functions attending the operation of ECLIP. The secretariat shall also be responsible for the issuances of notices of meetings; preparation of venues for the meetings including logistical support; taking down, dissemination and filing of Minutes of meetings; correspondence and allied functions.

When necessary, the City Administrator may assign and designate other City Government personnel to perform roles and functions relative to and necessary for the proper conduct of all administrative investigations and proceedings.

--- [Page 6] ---
**Page 6 of 21**

**Ord. No. 0998-22**

**SECTION 10. MEETINGS - The E-CLIP Committee and the Kalinaw Village shall meet quarterly or at least four (4) times a year. A special meeting, whenever warranted, may be called for. The agenda shall contain plans, updates, resolutions of issues and concerns and other matters related to the faithful implementation of E-CLIP and the operation of Kalinaw Village which provides interventions and other pertinent assistance and services for the FRs and FVEs in Davao City.**

**CHAPTER IV. DEFINITION OF TERMS**

**SECTION 11. DEFINITION OF TERMS - As used for purposes of this Ordinance, all terms and phrases are defined in the Definition of Terms, as follows:**

**Cost Valuation**
- The valuated cost of the firearm based on the price ceiling set for a particular kind, make, and calibre and its condition upon turn-in, which shall be determined by the PNP Provincial/ HUC/ ICC Logistics Office, AFP, and Provincial/HU/JCC DILG representatives of the E-CLIP Committee.

**Counseling Service**
- The process of assisting and guiding the FRs and FVEs in resolving their personal, social, or psychological problems and difficulties.

**Deradicalization**
- The process of reversing the radical/rebellious mindset of the FRs and the FVEs prior to their return to the mainstream society and become productive and law-abiding citizens by undergoing Deradicalization Program.

**Deradicalization Program**
- Aims to educate and prepare the FRs and FVEs for their enrollment to the E-CLIP and to ensure the deradicalization of the FRs and FVEs.

**Disposal**
- To sell by public bidding of the demilitarized/destroyed firearms and the destruction of ammunition and explosives per approved procedures.

**Disposition**
- The procedures to be followed in the handling of turned-in firearms to include acceptance, documentation, recording, and disposal.

**E-CLIP Committee Implementation Plan (ECCIP)**
- The plan of the Province/Highly Urbanized City (HUC) reflecting therein the consolidated needs of the FRs and FVEs and the budget needed to implement and monitor its progress. It shall form part of the Peace and Order and Public Safety (POPS) Plan.

**E-CLIP Information System (IS)**
- A customizable database system designed to methodically collect, store, track, manage, interpret, and utilize data on former rebels and receiving units given the focused, customized, efficient, collaborative, and holistic approach taken in the implementation of E-CLIP.

--- [Page 7] ---
Page 7 of 21
Ord. No. 0998-22
Firearms (FA)
any hand-held or portable weapon, whether small
or light FA/weapon, that expels or is designed to
expel a bullet, shot, slug, missile or any projectile,
which is discharged by means of expansive force of
gases from burning gunpowder or other form of
combustion or any similar instrument or
implement. The barrel, frame or receiver is
considered a firearm.
Former Rebels (FRs)
refer to the partner-stakeholders (beneficiaries) of
the program who were members of the Communist
Party of the Philippines (CPP), New People's Army
(NPA), National Democratic Front (NDF) and Militia
Ng Bayan (MBS) who voluntarily abandoned the
armed struggle to become productive members of
the society.
Former Rebel Reintegration Plan
(FRRP)
the plan resulting from the individual assessment
undertaken by the City Welfare and
Development Office (CSWDO) with the Former
Rebel (FR). The identified needs of the FR shall be
matched with the existing available resources of
the province or resources that may be tapped to
address the needs of the FR.
Former Violent Extremists (FVEs)
refer to the partner-stakeholders (beneficiaries) of
the program who were members of the Abu Sayyaf
Group, Maute Group, Dawlah Islamiya,
Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters, Turaife
Group and other violent extremist groups that
maybe identified by the Joint AFP-PNP Intelligence
Committee (JAPIC).
Former Violent Extremists Reintegration
Plan (FVERP)
the plan resulting from the individual assessment
undertaken by CSWDO's Authorized Personnel with
the FVE. The identified needs of the FVE shall be
matched with the existing available resources of
the province/city resources that may be tapped to
address the needs of the FVE.
Halfway House
the temporary residence that will serve as the
processing Center for FRs and FVEs. This could be
a new physical structure that will be established in
Provinces/HUCs that have expressed the need for
such facility.
Healing
refers to the restoration and repairing of
unbalanced emotional scars or wounds
experienced by the FRs and FVEs.

--- [Page 8] ---
Healing and Reconciliation (H & R) refers to both the process and the goal in obtaining healing. It also refers to re-establishing relationships between and among individuals, groups, and communities. H & R also contributes to the restoration of the psychological and social ways of the FR and FVE so that they are better able to attain personal healing. The FRs and FVEs are working towards obtaining the goal of establishing healthy relationships with others and becoming a productive member of their community.

Immediate Family - the spouse, direct descendants, or ascendants, by consanguinity or affinity, of the FRs and FVEs.

Joint AFP-PNP Intelligence Committee (JAPIC) - refers to a body created by virtue of AFP-PNP Joint Standing Operating Procedures (JSOP) Number 01-2008, issued on 3 June 2008, which shall be the source of the authenticity of the FR and FVE.

Militia ng Bayan - refers to the mass supporters/individuals who have been indoctrinated, who may or may not be directly involved in violent armed struggle but can provide mass support to the revolutionary movement of the CPP/NPA/NDF when organized. These organized individuals form part of the base mass that serves as revolutionary enforcement in the barrio. They secure the NPA forces while in the community and, at times, are even armed to reinforce the NPA during encounters. They are trained in the use of weapons such as Explosives Device (IED) deployment and detonation, among other armed activities, which eventually qualifies them to become the main source of NPA regulars.

Psychological/Psychiatric Service - refers to the psychological evaluation upon admission in the halfway house to determine the behavioral manifestations and mental state of the FR and FVE for eventual referral to a psychiatrist, if necessary.

Program Partner-stakeholders (Beneficiaries) - FR and FVE who have expressed the desire to abandon armed violence and become productive members of the society, and, who has undergone the appropriate counseling, and needs assessment by the City Social Welfare and Development Officer (CSWDO).

Receiving Unit - Any of the following institutions or personalities with whom the FR and FVE feel safe and confident to surface. Receiving units could be AFP, PNP, CSB, Local Government Unit (LGU) officials, business, church, or community leaders, and any civilian individual.

--- [Page 9] ---
Page 9 of 21
Ord. No.0998-22
Reconciliation
- is rebuilding and renewal of mutual respect after the conflict.
Regular Members of NPA
- refers to full-time NPA members, such as those belonging to Sandatahang Yunit Pampropaganda (SYP), Platoon Genlily (PLAGER), Sentro de Grabidad (SG) and Regional Yunit Genlily (RYG).
Reintegration
- refers to a process where 1) the FR or FVE voluntarily disarms and undergoes mainstreaming into a civilian and productive life, and 2) the FRs and FVEs socio-economic well-being, including their security and safety, psycho-social and legal impediments are attended to by the government.
Serviceable firearms
- refers to FAs that are in working condition based on the PNP Guidelines on firearms disposition. It also includes factory-made and improvised firearms.
CHAPTER V
CONTENT AND GUIDELINES
SECTION 12. GUIDING PRINCIPLES - The implementation of the program and Kalinaw Village Operations shall be guided by the following precepts:
12a. It shall be people-centered. The primary focus of E-CLIP and Kalinaw Village Program shall be on people. Non-discrimination and fair and equitable treatment of the stakeholders, participants and beneficiaries are core principles of the City Government's approach to Reintegration. Individuals shall not be discriminated on the basis of sex, age, class, race, religion, nationality, ethnic origin, political opinion, or other personal characteristics and associations; and there shall be no differences in the support provided based on the specific needs of each sex and those of differing ages and physical abilities and the Indigenous Peoples. The appropriate interventions aim to improve the quality of life of the FRs, FVEs, their families and their communities.
12b. It shall be flexible, transparent and accountable. The E-CLIP/Reintegration Program shall be flexible, transparent and accountable: Being flexible means that while complying with the program, it shall be adapted to suit the situation in Davao City where the assistance and programs for FRs and FVEs are being implemented, and easily adaptable to respond to highly volatile situations and unexpected circumstances.
By being transparent, the program shall be carried out in such a way that information is available to, and broadly understandable by the participants, beneficiaries, partners and stakeholders, subject to reasonable limits needed to protect privacy and ensure security.
The Davao City E-CLIP Committee and Kalinaw Village shall be accountable to all the donors, the national agency partners, beneficiaries and participants. Mechanisms set by this Ordinance including the provisions found in JMC 01, Series of 2021, shall be established and implemented to ensure adequate reporting, monitoring and evaluation of all the Davao City E-CLIP and Kalinaw Village operations and finances.

--- [Page 10] ---
12c. It shall be nationally owned. The primary responsibility for E-CLIP/Reintegration Program rests with national government as the main author of the Reintegration program; the City Government's role is to support the process as part of the Whole-of-Nation approach while acknowledging the community as a vital unit in the society that directly assists the FRs and FVEs to become productive citizens and part of the mainstream.

Genuine national ownership requires the participation of a wide range of State and non-State actors at the national, regional and local levels, including Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) and Civil Society Organizations (CSOs). The City Government shall work to ensure E-CLIP/Reintegration programs are nationally owned. The City Government shall use every opportunity to systematically develop and strengthen the national capacity for this Program.

12d. It shall be integrated. The E-CLIP/Reintegration Program is a combined peacekeeping, peace-building, and development, and involves various national agencies, military, police and civilian actors and institutions.

As such, this particular program requires an integrated approach, which in turn requires much more than simple coordination. As shown by the E-CLIP Committee composition, being chaired by the Mayor, the Davao City Government, through the E-CLIP Committee, shall ensure:

o joint and coherent planning, programming and funding at the national, the regional and the local levels;

o adequate and appropriate links with related programs, such as recovery or rule of law; and

o appropriate links with other regional, provincial and cities E-CLIP/Reintegration Program initiatives.

12e. It must be well-planned. The E-CLIP/Reintegration Program and Kalinaw Village operations shall be well planned to ensure quality in the delivery of services. This will be ensured by paying particular attention to the following key issues: safety and security; coordination; assessment, monitoring and evaluation; information and sensitization; and a time-bound transition and clear exit strategy corresponding to the FRs and FVEs Reintegration Plan.

It is also important to recognize that the FRs and FVEs are active partners of the program and shall not simply be treated as "beneficiaries," and therefore have a crucial and most vital role in the implementation process, thus, their membership in the E-CLIP Committee and in employing FRs and FVEs in Kalinaw Village.

SECTION 13. PARTNERS-STAKEHOLDERS - The following partner-stakeholders shall enjoy the benefits and other assistance provided under the Davao City Enhanced Comprehensive Local Integration Program (E-CLIP) and other pertinent Assistance:

13a. Former Rebels (FRs):

13a.1. Refer to the partner-stakeholders (beneficiaries) of the program who were members of the Communist Party of the Philippines (CPP), New People's Army (NPA), National Democratic Front (NDF) and Militia ng Bayan (MBs) who voluntarily abandoned the armed struggle to become productive members of the society;

--- [Page 11] ---
13a.2. Those who have surfaced on April 3, 2018 onwards and have expressed the desire to abandon armed violence and become productive members of the society, including their immediate family members;

13a.3. Those who surfaced starting July 1, 2016 as well as those who have been processed but did not receive the full assistance under the Comprehensive Local Integration Program.

13b. Former Violent Extremists (FVEs)

13b.1. Refer to the partner-stakeholders (beneficiaries) of the program who were members of the Abu Sayyaf Group, Maute Group, Dawlah Islamiya, Bangsamoro Islamic Freedom Fighters, Turaifate Group and other violent extremist groups that may be identified by the Joint AFP-PNP Intelligence Committee (JAPIC).

13b.2. Those who have surfaced on April 3, 2018, onwards and have expressed the desire to abandon armed violence and be part of the mainstream society including their immediate family members, if applicable;

13b.3. Those FVEs who surfaced starting July 1, 2016, provided that circumstances of their surrender to receiving unit may be proven, and that assistance of the same nature was not received.

13c. FRs and FVEs who were already beneficiaries of any previous reintegration programs shall not be qualified to receive the Davao City E-CLIP and other pertinent assistance provided in Kalinaw Village.

13d. Joint AFP-PNP Intelligence Committee (JAPIC) Certification

13d.1. Both FRs and FVEs must be certified by the Joint AFP-PNP Intelligence Committee (JAPIC) to be qualified for E-CLIP and other pertinent assistance provided by Kalinaw Village.

13d.2. The JAPIC Certification shall hold even if the FR or FVE dies or has a pending case while his/her enrollment to the program is being processed. In such instances, the identified beneficiaries will receive the E-CLIP benefits and other pertinent assistance provided by Kalinaw Village. If the JAPIC failed to identify/designate any beneficiaries, the Davao City E-CLIP Committee has the authority to conduct validation/investigation as to the possible selection of a new beneficiary based on pertinent laws on succession.

13d.3. In the issuance of JAPIC certificate, the Periodic Status Report of Threat Group (PSR-TG) list for 2018 shall be the basis in the determination of the eligibility of the FRs and FVEs who will be enrolled in E-CLIP and other pertinent assistance. If the FR or FVE is not listed in the 2018 PSR-TG list, only those who can conclusively prove FRs and FVEs, on or before December 31, 2018, shall be considered for enrollment in the program upon further assessment and decision of the Davao City E-CLIP Committee.

SECTION 14. KALINAW VILLAGE ADMISSION CRITERIA - Regardless of sex, status, age, race, those who satisfy the following conditions are eligible to be accepted into the Kalinaw Village, to wit:

--- [Page 12] ---
Page 12 of 21
Ord. No. 0998-22

14a. Former Members of the Communist Party of the Philippines (CPP), New People's Army (NPA), National Democratic Front (NDF) and Milita ng Bayan (MB) who surfaced from April 03, 2018, onwards.

14b. Those who have surfaced from July 01, 2016 and has been processed in a halfway house but did not receive the full assistance of the E- CLIP for the period July 1, 2016 to April 3, 2018.

14c. Modes of Admission may be:
• Referral - refers to FRs or FVEs who have been referred by AFP/PNP, LGUs, NGOs, church groups and personalities with the knowledge and approval of the Davao City E-CLIP Committee Chair.
• Walk-in - refers to FRs or FVEs who come directly to the home to seek assistance and protection with a referral from any government institution.

SECTION 15. BENEFITS AND OTHER ASSISTANCE - Along with the benefits and assistance provided by the National Government Agencies and subject to availability of funds, the LGU shall also provide the following:

a. Firearm Remuneration;
b. Educational services from the Educational Benefit System Unit (EBSU) and Scholarship on Tertiary Education Program (STEP) for their children from the City Mayor's Office;
c. Financial Assistance for Livelihood Assistance in Crisis Situation;
d. Food and other basic needs and transportation assistance from the City Social Welfare and Development Office (CSWDO);
e. Medical services from the City Health Office and Lingap Para sa Maharlap program;
f. Hog raising and native chicken raising from the City Veterinarian's Office;
g. Home Gardening and Farming from the City Agriculturist's Office;
h. Assistance in the Registration of Certificate of Live Birth of FRs and FVEs from the City Local Civil Registrar's Office;
i. Trainings and Seminars for Proper Waste Disposal Management from the City Environment and Natural Resources Office (CENRO);
j. Kalinaw Village provides free board and lodging to FRs and FVEs for a period of four (4) to six (6) months and also caters or provides the various intervention programs during their accommodation and food assistance to families they left behind; and
k. Provide free employment facilitation services and other information on job opportunities for FRs and FVEs from the Public Employment Service Office.

--- [Page 13] ---
Page 13 of 21
Ord. No. 0998-22

The foregoing offices shall give priority to the FRs and FVEs for the aforesaid benefits and services.

SECTION 16. E-CLIP PHASES AND PROCESS - THE FOLLOWING ARE THE GUIDELINES FOR THE E-CLIP PHASES AND PROCESSES, TO WIT:

16a. Pre-Surfacing Phase. This refers to the initial discussions between:
1.) A member of the CPP, NPA, NDF, MB, Abu Sayaf Group, Maute group, Dawla Islamiya, Bangsamoro, Islamic Freedom Fighter, Turfare Group, and other violent extremists' groups that may be identified by JAPIC, who is deciding to surface;
2.) The receiving unit.

Step 1. The FR or FVE signifies his/her intention to surface in any of the following receiving unit/personality: APP, PNP, LGUs, CSOs, and to any civilian individual with whom the FR or FVE feels safe and confident to surface.

Step 2. The Receiving Unit takes primary responsibility in informing the surfacing FR and FVE of the program and processes and interventions that can be extended to him/her upon surfacing. For an individual citizen taking care of the FR and FVE, she/he can bring him to any of the institutions mentioned in Step 1. The Davao City E-CLIP Committee, the CSWDO through Kalinaw Village shall be informed immediately of the names of the surfacing FRs and FVEs. The E-CLIP Committee and Kalinaw Village shall ensure that the confidentiality of the names of the FRs and FVEs will be protected.

16b. Actual Surfacing Phase. This refers to the conduct of preliminary interviews using the prescribed Initial Interview form, turning in of firearms, joint validation of AFP and PNP, and filling out of the E-CLIP Enrollment Form. The duration of the processing phase shall not exceed two (2) weeks from the time the FR or FVE has surfaced to the receiving unit.

Step 3A. The CSWDO or designated personnel by the E-CLIP Committee validates the name of the surfacing FR or FVE from the databank to ascertain whether such person was a recipient of the past reintegrations programs. If the surfacing FR or FVE has already availed the assistance, the CSWDO shall inform him/her that he/she can no longer avail the program under E-CLIP with the DLIG-administered package of assistance, and may refer him/her for possible assistance under the regular programs of Kalinaw Village and other partner agencies.

Step 3B. Based on the result of the validation, if the FR or FVE is eligible for the Program, he or she shall be endorsed for processing. While awaiting the enrollment, he/she may be billeted in Kalinaw Village.

Step 4A. Parallel or before this process, JAPIC shall convene to perform the authentication procedures of the surfacing FR or FVE. This shall be done more than two (2) weeks after an FR or FVE has surfaced.

Step 4B. If the FR or FVE has firearms, the PNPH shall secure the firearms for appropriate processing.

--- [Page 14] ---
**Page 14 of 21**

**Ord. No. 0998-22**

**Step 4C.** The JAPIC shall submit to the E-CLIP Committee, through CSWDO, the results of its verification, copy furnish the DILG City Director, within two (2) weeks after the FR or FVE had surfaced.

**Step 4D.** Upon receipt of the JAPIC Certification, the E-CLIP Enrollment Form shall be acknowledged by the FR or FVE to be assisted by the Social Worker assigned by CSWDO. This shall be attested by the DILG and PNP City Directors, CSWDO and CSO Representative, approved by the City Mayor or his/her designated representative, and the AFP Brigade Commander.

**Step 4E.** After the completion of the E-CLIP Enrollment Form, the CSWDO shall facilitate the provision of social protection services for FRs and FVEs such as, but not limited to, health and medical assistance, PHILHEALTH membership, issuance of IDs/identification, education assistance, and other services while staying in Kalinaw Village.

**Step 5A.** While the FR or FVE is at Kalinaw Village, the Social Worker assigned by CSWDO shall conduct the interview using the Initial Interview Form. The admission orientation shall be facilitated by the CSWDO or designated personnel in Kalinaw Village, and administer the Profiling Interview Form.

**Step 5B.** The Davao City E-CLIP Committee shall ensure that appropriate security arrangements and necessities (i.e., meals, clothing) for the FR and FVE are provided on time while in Kalinaw Village, which shall include, but not limited to:

- Psychological/Psychiatric services;
- Counselling services;
- Legal Services;
- Life skills/values formation.

**Step 6.** The Kalinaw Village shall facilitate the processing of the E-CLIP package of assistance for FRs and FVEs to all applicable agencies, local and national.

**Step 7.** Settlement of Claims: The Kalinaw Village shall assist the FRs and FVEs in the processing, settlement, and claims of checks granted to the FR or FVE, and/or Receiving Unit coming from the government agencies.

**1.6c. Reintegration Phase:** This refers to the crafting and implementation of the FRRP or VFRP, which shall serve as a guide as to what kind of assistance should be provided to the FR or FVE, and the time frame of its release.

**Step 8.** The Kalinaw Village, with the active participation of the FR or FVE, shall accomplish the Former Rebel Reintegration Plan (FRRP) or Former Violent Extremist Reintegration Plan (FVERP). A Business Plan (Munagkahan Proyekto) shall also be prepared by Kalinaw Village together with the FR and FVE. This will be done in consultation with concerned partner agencies.

**Step 9.** The Kalinaw Village shall assist in the implementation of the FRRP or VFRP as may be contained in the following packages:

- Social Protection Package (i.e., issuance of government ID, registration of birth and marriage, registration in the Philippine Identification System [PhilID], Philhealth enrollment and others);

--- [Page 15] ---
**Page 15 of 21**

**Ord. No. 0998-22**

• Healing and Reconciliation (i.e., psycho-emotional, community reconciliation, life skills training, and others);

• Legal Security and Disarmament (i.e., legal counsel, security guarantees, and disarmament, and others);

• Economic Mainstreaming (i.e., employment referral, self-employment/micro-enterprise development, and others).

Step 10. If the FR or FVE dies or has a pending case and is unable to directly implement the project, livelihood assistance shall be provided to his/her identified beneficiary. This will satisfy the government's commitment to FR and FVE.

Step 11. Upon completion of the LGU's basic healing and reconciliation program, the FR or FVE is discharged from Kalinaw Village after receiving his/her livelihood assistance.

Step 12. Other assistance as stipulated in the FRPP or FVERP shall be provided after the FR or FVE has been discharged from Kalinaw Village.

SECTION 17. KALINAW VILLAGE AND ITS GUIDELINES FOR ADMISSION

Kalinaw Village is a temporary shelter facility in Davao City for former members of the Communist Party of the Philippines – New People’s Army – National Democratic Front (CPP-NPA-NDF), Abu Sayyaf group, Maute group, Dawla Islamiya, Bangsamoro, Islamic Freedom Fighter, Tauraffe Group, Milita ng Bayan and other foreign violent extremists who have abandoned armed struggle and renegaded into the mainstream society.

Kalinaw Village serves as a venue where various interventions can be undertaken in preparation for the mainstreaming of FRs or FVEs. These programs range from de-radicalization, social healing and reconciliation, spiritual and moral enhancement, health and wellness, sports, and other physical activities, etc. To optimize the benefits of this shelter, it must be equipped to allow the conduct of education and skills training and other relevant activities.

Kalinaw Village is primarily for the purpose of providing temporary shelter to FRs and FVEs. However, in cases of natural or man-made disasters wherein the City is in need of temporary evacuation centers, the House may be used temporarily as a multipurpose facility to house evacuees, provided no FRs or FVEs are occupying the same.

SECTION 18. ADMISSION PROCEDURE - The Kalinaw Village admission procedure and in-processing procedures will follow those as stipulated in the Kalinaw Village Operations Manual.

Admission procedures and in-processing procedures may be subject to change upon consultation with the E-CLIP Committee and Kalinaw Village.

SECTION 19. CONFIDENTIALITY - To ensure security and confidentiality, no media or any researchers are allowed to conduct any interviews to an FR or FVE without the approval of the FR/FVE, the CSWDD Head, and E-CLIP Committee.

SECTION 20. RE-ADMISSION - Residents who left the center without permission may be re-admitted upon assessment and recommendation by the assigned Social Worker in Kalinaw Village. An FR or FVE who left the facility without permission and return shall be dealt with under the provisions of the Code of Conduct and Disciplinary Services Section for re-admission. Disciplinary actions shall be imposed but this should not jeopardize the healing of the FRs and FVEs nor be deprived of the programs and services of the Kalinaw Village.

--- [Page 16] ---
**SECTION 21. KALINAW VILLAGE OPERATIONAL GUIDELINES**

The Kalinaw Village shall be governed by general guidelines and policies on operations, to wit:

a. All FRs and FVEs admitted in Kalinaw Village shall be treated with care, understanding, respect, and support that they need.

b. Donations for Kalinaw Village, either in cash or in kind, shall be properly recorded, accounted for, and reported to the City Government Office and the E-CLIP Committee.

c. All personnel of Kalinaw Village regardless of position and employment status shall not receive any gifts from potential clients and other significant persons involved in the healing and recovery process. Gifts may be given to a certain worker in kind, but not monetary in nature, due to exemplary performance which is contributory to the healing process.

d. An FR or FVE who manifests psychotic behavior, mental and personal disorder shall be immediately referred to medical professional or mental health hospitals for further psychological/psychiatric treatment.

e. The duration of stay of an FR and FVE in Kalinaw Village shall be subject to the duration of the program crafted by the Halfway House Administration for FRs and FVEs.

f. FRs or FVEs who left the home without any permission may be re-admitted upon assessment and recommendation by the assigned Social Worker but subject to disciplinary action.

g. Any untoward incident in Kalinaw Village such as accidents, deaths, suicides, and riots, shall be reported to the Security Personnel who shall then report to the Center Manager. The Center Manager shall officially inform the E-CLIP Committee of the incident within 24 hours from receipt of the report. Likewise, local AFP and PNP units shall also be notified of the incident and be allowed to conduct appropriate investigation if needed.

h. Thorough planning and team conferences shall be undertaken before an FR or FVE shall be discharged from the home to ensure that there is support system from the Local Government Unit, Barangay Council, and families concerned.

i. All cases referred to in Kalinaw Village shall be treated with confidentiality and can only be discussed between and among the reintegration team.

**SECTION 22. KALINAW VILLAGE TREATMENT FOR FRs AND FVEs**

The City Government through the Kalinaw Village assumes no responsibility for the safety of reintegration participants where the FR or FVE refuses or chooses to stay out of the center.

In such cases, the Center Manager shall require the FR or FVE to identify at least one (1) person of good standing and with known residence in the community willing to take the responsibility of keeping his or her safety, and in the presentation of the person for the purpose of undertaking and completing the necessary reintegration processes.

--- [Page 17] ---
**Page 17 of 21
Ord. No. 0988-21**

**SECTION 23. KALINAW VILLAGE VISITATION POLICIES - FRS or FVEs can enjoy visitation from families, relatives, referring party and friends. Non-family members shall first seek the approval of the Center Manager prior to visiting an FR or FVE.**

23a. The Center Manager may disapprove the request for the visit if:

1. It can hamper the healing and recovery process of the FR or FVE to be visited or other former rebels in the facility;
2. The FR or FVE to be visited does not want to entertain the visitor;
3. The visit may jeopardize the operations of Kalinaw Village; or,
4. If the visitor exhibits rude or untoward behavior towards the staff of the Kalinaw Village, FR or FVE.

23b. No visitors are allowed to bring the resident outside the Kalinaw Village unless approved by the Center Manager. The approval shall be in terms of an "Out on Pass Slip" accomplished by the FR or FVE and approved by the Center Manager.

23c. Visitors can only be entertained at designated areas.

23d. For visiting spouses wanting to stay overnight, accommodation shall be arranged by the Halfway House Administration at conjugal areas or family home.

23e. Media practitioners or researchers wanting to interview FRS or FVEs shall first seek the approval of the CSWDO Head or the E-CLIP Committee. The CSWDO Head or E-CLIP Committee can impose certain conditions to the output from such interview such as blurring of the FRS or FVE's face/s, alteration on the voice, use of aliases, and non-release of other data that may compromise the safety and security of the FR/S or FVE/S or the operations of Kalinaw Village.

23f. Cameras and other video devices during the visit shall be strictly prohibited unless otherwise approved by CSWDO or the E-CLIP Committee.

**SECTION 24. LEAVING WITHOUT PERMISSION - In cases when a certain FR or FVE leaves the Kalinaw Village without permission, the following shall be undertaken:**

a. When such an incident is discovered, it shall be reported to the Programs and Services Sedeia Head and the Security Personnel on duty. They will then inform the Halfway House Administrator of the incident. The family and relatives of the FR or FVE shall be informed of the incident through the fastest means of communication.

b. A roll call of the remaining FRS or FVEs in the Kalinaw Village shall be conducted to ensure that all residents are accounted for. FRS or FVEs may be interviewed to determine information on the delinquent resident's reason for leaving;

c. If it is discovered that the FR or FVE has gone home, coordination with the local government units shall be undertaken to assess and monitor the FR or FVE. In such cases, the Halfway House Administration, if possible, should talk to the FR or FVE to determine the reason for leaving, and possibly convince them to return to the Kalinaw Village. An Incident Report shall be submitted to the E-CLIP Committee within 24 hours of discovering that an FR or FVE left the Kalinaw Village without permission;

d. The Security personnel on duty shall notify the nearest PNP or AFP unit to blotter the case. A copy of the blotter shall be retrieved and included in the case folder of the FR or FVE.

--- [Page 18] ---
Page 18 of 21
Ord. No. 0998-22

SECTION 25. SPECIAL OCCASIONS - FRs or FVEs shall not be deprived of opportunities to enjoy and participate during special occasions while staying in the Kalinaw Village. This includes activities that may be done outside such as birthdays/s of their family members, anniversaries (wedding, death, etc.), weddings, and wake of deceased relatives or friends, provided that they seek permission and approval of the Halfway House Administration.

In coordination with the local AFP and PNP units, activities done outside the premises of the facility shall be provided with security.

Birthdays shall be celebrated monthly for each celebrant and simple activities shall be undertaken, but strictly no liquor and other odd activities that can cause trouble and harm.

SECTION 26. FRs OR FVEs WITH PENDING COURT CASES - For FRs or FVEs with pending court cases, they shall be governed by the following Rules, as follows:

a. Custodial management for FRs or FVEs with pending court cases may be placed under the responsibility of the Kalinaw Village and in presentation of the Center Manager for the purpose of undertaking and completing the necessary court processes subject to the approval of the E-CLIP Committee and the Center Manager;

b. The Kalinaw Village shall be responsible in taking care of the FR or FVE whose custody was entrusted to them, whose participation in activities and privileges, and whose duration of stay may be subject to conditions that may be set by a competent court;

c. In coordination with the local PNP or AFP units, the Kalinaw Village is responsible in transporting the FR or FVE to attend court hearings or during consultations with his/her legal counsel;

d. The legal counsel of the FR or FVE should be allowed access to visit his/her client any time;

e. In coordination with the local AFP or PNP units, extra security measures may be put in place to ensure that the FR or FVE cannot escape from the custody of Kalinaw Village;

f. Updates on the case of the FR or FVE shall also be included in the report of the Kalinaw Village Center Manager or the E-CLIP Committee;

g. The Davao City E-CLIP Committee and Kalinaw Village shall issue supplementary guidelines specifically for the treatment of FRs or FVEs with pending court cases.

SECTION 27. REQUIRED DOCUMENTS - The required documents, as basis for the release of the assistance, shall be based on the guidelines of the concerned agencies or offices.

--- [Page 19] ---
**SECTION 28. SECURITY PROTOCOL**

a. The Kalinaw Village, as designated processing areas where the processing of applications for E-CLIP and Intervention Programs, Services and assistance to FRs or FVEs takes place, should be secured at all times. The E-CLIP Committee shall seek the support of the local PNP for the security requirement of the premises and the applicants. The PHP, in coordination with the AFP, determines additional security for high-profile FRs and FVEs while being processed.

b. The E-CLIP Committee shall also ensure the FRs or FVEs safety and security by limiting public access to their identity. Basic information such as name and address as well as pictures shall not be publicized. All the documents of the E-CLIP Committee and Kalinaw Village shall be treated with confidentiality. Only personnel authorized by the E-CLIP Committee and Kalinaw Village shall have access to the documents.

c. Upon the surfacing of the FRs or FVEs until their reintegration in the community security protocols vis-à-vis media shall be observed at all phases. FRs and FVEs' names, address, and location shall be treated with confidentiality at all times. In cases wherein the information of the FR or FVE was unofficially disclosed in any form, an administrative case may be filed against the person or institution which disseminated the information.

d. Non-disclosure agreements shall be executed by all members of the E-CLIP Committee, Kalinaw Village, and their respective personnel and employees who are invited in the admission process, pre-discharge conferences, and other similar meetings.

**CHAPTER VI**

**MONITORING, EVALUATION AND LEARNING MECHANISM**

**SECTION 29. MONITORING AND EVALUATION**

a. The Davao City Government through the E-CLIP Committee, CSWDO, and Peace and Order Council shall monitor and report the progress and the sustainability of the implementation of the program. The Davao City Chief Executive as the chair of the E-CLIP Committee shall call the CSWDO and the Punong Barangay to monitor the progress of the FRs or FVEs using the prescribed Monitoring Evaluation and Learning (MEL) Form.

b. Initial Report shall be submitted a month after the FR or FVE has been discharged from Kalinaw Village and every quarter thereafter for two (2) consecutive years. The CSWDO and the Barangay Official shall be required to submit a copy of the accepted quarterly Monitoring Evaluation and Learning form of the FR and FVE to the E-CLIP Committee and Kalinaw Village.

**SECTION 30. SUBMISSION OF REPORTS - Kalinaw Village shall render regular administrative reports to the E-CLIP Committee regarding its operations and the implementation of their programs and services for the FRs or FVEs enrolled.**

--- [Page 20] ---
**SECTION 31. CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT INTERVENTIONS -** The Davao City E-CLIP Committee and Kainlaw Village in partnership with DILG, AFP, PNP, and NBOO PMO shall conduct capacity development interventions for E-CLIP partners and stakeholders.

**CHAPTER VII FUNDING**

**SECTION 32. The funding requirements for the implementation of the Davao City E-CLIP and Kainlaw Village shall come from the funds allocated by the local government, subject to compliance of government accounting and auditing rules and regulations.**

The budgetary needs pertaining to the effective implementation of the Kainlaw Village pertinent services, programs, and intervention, including the payment of honoraria, incidental and other expenses to the City E-CLIP Committee, its Secretariat, Technical Staff, and other appropriate personnel, as may hereinafter be identified, shall be taken from the available funds of the City Government of Davao, as well as from the funds allocated by the national government for the herein purposes, subject to compliance of the City Government and the National Government accounting and auditing rules and regulations.

**CHAPTER XII FINAL PROVISION**

**SECTION 33. PENAL CLAUSE -** Any violation of this Ordinance, existing laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations, shall be a ground for the cancellation or revocation of membership of the Committee, application of the E-CLIP program, and withdrawal of any incentives granted under this Ordinance.

**33a. Kainlaw Village-Halfway House Administration shall institute a complaint/grievance mechanism where former rebels or even employees can file complaints or grievances against employees or even former rebels. Both the complainant/s and defendant/s and the case itself shall be treated with confidentiality. Appropriate investigation and disciplinary action shall be meted in accordance with existing laws, policies, and procedures. The complaints and progress of the case shall be reported to the E-CLIP Committee.**

**SECTION 34. SEPARABILITY CLAUSE -** If any provision of this Ordinance is declared invalid or unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected thereby shall remain valid and subsisting.

**SECTION 35. REPEALING CLAUSE -** All Ordinances, Executive Orders, and rules and regulations or parts thereof, which are inconsistent or in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

**SECTION 36. EFFECTIVITY -** This Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon its approval.

ENACTED, on the 28th day of June 2022, by a unanimous vote of all the Members of the Sanggunian, there being a quorum.

--- [Page 21] ---
Page 21 of 21
Ord. No. 0998-22
CERTIFIED CORRECT:
CHABIN N. SANTOS
Secretary to the Sangguniang Panlungsod
(City Government Department Head II)
ATTESTED:
EDGAR P. IBIYAN Jr.
President Pro-Tempore
Temporary Presiding Officer
cns/kjtq
APPROVED: AUG. 18 2022
SARA Z. DUTERTE
City Mayor
SEBASTIAN Z. DUTERTE
City Mayor
Davao City
ATTESTED:
ATTY. FRANCIS MARK H. LAYOG
Acting City Administrator
ATTY. ZULEIKAT T. LOPEZ
City Administrator
AN ORDINANCE INSTITUTIONALIZING THE DAVAO CITY ENHANCED COMPREHENSIVE LOCAL
INTEGRATION PROGRAM (E-CLIP) FOR FORMER REBELS OR FORMER VIOLENT EXTREMISTS IN DAVAO
CITY AND OTHER PERTINENT PROGRAMS AND SERVICES AS PROVIDED BY THE HALFWAY HOUSE
KALINAWI VILLAGE
