=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 000132-03 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
13th City Council
14th Regular Session
Series of 2003
Republika ng Pilipinas
SANGGUNIANG PANLUNGSOOD
Lungsod ng Davao
PRESENT:
Vice Mayor
Luis C. Bongoyan - Presiding Officer
Councillor
Nilo G. Alellera
Councillor
Ma. Belen S. Aceleta
Councillor
Victoria E. Advincula, Sr.
Councillor
Wilberto E. Alag
Councillor
Leonardo A. Avila, III
Councillor
Gerard B. Basyay
Councillor
Salvador V. Cainglas, Sr.
Councillor
Damiel C. Dayanghiang
Councillor
Jimmy G. Dureza
Councillor
Emmanuel D. Guilicia, Sr.
Councillor
Francisco Mabel A. Laman
Councillor
Bette M. Marabao
Councillor
Angela A. Librado
Councillor
Libororo V. Iunnas
Councillor
Amilibangga T. Manding
Councillor
Trevestra M. Marsabon
Councillor
Thomas M. Meneses, Jr.
Councillor
Mynna G. F. Dalope Ortiz
Councillor
Susan Isabel C. Reta
Councillor
Isidro T. Umab
GN OFFICIAL BUSINESS:
Councillor
Bonifacio E. Militar - OIC, City Mayor's Office
ARSENJI:
Councillor
Afezias C. Almedrurus - On Sick Leave
Councillor
April Marie C. Dayap
Councillor
Shane L. Delor - On Sick Leave
Councillor
Diosdado Angelo A. Malapuz, Sr. - On Special Privilege Leave
Councillor
Beehlaven D. Orculle - On Sick Leave
ORDINANCE NO. 0112-03
Series of 2003
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE WOMEN DEVELOPMENT CODE AND CREATING THE INTEGRATED GENDER AND DEVELOPMENT DIVISION UNDER THE CITY MAYOR'S OFFICE WITH FIGHT (5) PLANTILLA POSITIONS UNDER IT
Be it enacted by the Sangguniang Panlungsod of Davao City in session assembled that:

--- [Page 2] ---
Page 2 of 10
Ord No 0132-03
CHAPTER II
PROVISIONS FOR IMPLEMENTATION
SECTION 1. IGND (INTEGRATED GENDER AND DEVELOPMENT DIVISION) (IGD): Integrated Gender and Development Division is a division under the City Mayor's Office which shall act as the co-ordinative, regulatory and monitoring body of the Local Government of Davao City to focus on gender-sensitive projects and activities. It shall complement gender-related functions of other agencies of the local government.
SECTION 2. FUNCTIONS OF THE INTEGRATED GENDER AND DEVELOPMENT DIVISION:
A. Integrated Gender Coordinative Monitoring and Evaluation Section
1.1 Coordinates the preparation, assessment and updating of the Davao City Development Plan for Women for Women and ensures its implementation at all levels as well as the gender responsiveness in local development programs;
1.2 Undertakes collection of accurate sex and age disaggregated data on poverty situation and all aspects of economic activity and develops qualitative and quantitative indicators to facilitate the assessment of Davao City's economic performance from a gender perspective;
1.3 Develops data base for Davao City through establishment of a data resource materials and electronic data bank network;
1.4 Initiates and monitors continuing advocacy to promote women's economic, social and political empowerment and provides technical assistance in setting up and strengthening of mechanism on gender mainstreaming;
1.5 Ensures gender-sensitivity education and training for all local government departments/offices and barangay units by establishing standards of course contents for the guidance of government and private organizations;
1.6 Maintains and strengthens media relations specifically in the information education communication network; recognition of gender-sensitive offices and the recognition of women organizations as well as the gender fair people's organizations;
1.7 Aids and strengthens linkage in the identification and mobilization of resources and in building up the referral system;
B. Integrated Gender Regulatory Section
1.1 Proposes mechanisms and appropriate intervention models attending to the social context of women: specific problems and needs specifically in situations of violence or abuse for the guidance of all women-centered programs and services whether government or private. Particular consideration is given to a holistic and indigenous approach to women with social dysfunction which include but not limited to their physical biological, emotional, psychosocial and social needs;

--- [Page 3] ---
Page 3 of 10
Ord. No. 0132-03

1.2 Facilitates, preserves, enhances and promotes the aspects of the indigenous
Philippine culture which affects women positively throughout the
development process.

1.3 Sets standards for all women's gender and development mechanisms
established by all establishments and local government agencies and
institutions;

1.4 Ensures that planning, programming, and development of government
initiatives are gender responsive;

1.5 Assists in strengthening GAD focal points per E.O. 348, Office of the
President and Ordinance No. 3904;

1.6 Conducts policy studies on women's special concerns and practical needs
in coordination with the concerned non-government organizations;

1.7 Conducts studies on existing and proposed laws to ensure effective
intervention in policy making.

SECTION 3.
IGD ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE

--- [Page 4] ---
Section 3
ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE
City Mayor's Office
Organizational Position Chart
Page: 4 of 10
One No. 012-03
City Mayor
Chief of Staff
City Administrator
Communications Unit
Finance Section
Personnel Section
Human Resources Section
Public Relations Section
Sports Development Section
Cultural Affairs Section
Libraries
Director General's Office

--- [Page 5] ---
Page 5 of 10
Crd No. 012/03
INTEGRATED GENDER DEVELOPMENT DIVISION
Organizational / Position Chart
Development Mgr Office II (SG 16)
Integrated Gender Coordination Section
( SG - 15 )
1
· Development Mgr Office II
( SG - 11 )
1
· Clerk III
( SG - 4 )
Integrated Gender
Regulatory Section
( SG - 15 )
1
· Development Mgr Office I
( SG - 11 )
1
· Clerk II
( SG - 4 )

--- [Page 6] ---
Page 6 of 10
Ord No. 0132-03

SECTION 4. STAFFING PATTERN

Number Position
1 Development Management Officer IV
1 Development Management Officer III
2 Development Management Officer II
2 Development Management Officer I
2 Clerk II

8

Other positions may be created after an evaluation shall be made following a three-year program. Position titles should conform to listed positions in the Index of Occupational Services pursuant to circulars/announcements from the Department of Budget and Management.

SECTION 5. JOB DESCRIPTION OF IGDD POSITIONS

1. Development Management Officer IV

1.a. Formulates measures relevant to the gender and development concerns of the City in order to attain gender mainstreaming on local government policies through the conduct of research and other related studies.

1.b. Reviews the City Development Plan and Policies to ensure gender responsive programs of the City by way of facilitation workshops and consultations:

1.c. Examines and recommends fiscal plans and policies for consideration of the Local Finance Committee of the City Government and for inclusion in the yearly General Appropriations thru presentation of budget proposals and representation in the budget hearing.

1.d. Provides technical assistance to line departments/offices to carry out measures which will ensure effective implementation of gender and development programs of the city by strengthening collaboration among GAD Fiscal Persons as well as other mechanisms.

1.e. Maintains collaboration and partnerships among the line departments/offices, non-government organizations and other organized women federation councils in order to maximize potential resources thru effective evaluations.

1.f. Directs the execution of gender laws and policies and evaluates the results of GAD programs/projects and activities of the city for effective implementation of the same thru the conduct of periodic monitoring.

1.g. Performs such other functions as maybe directed from time to time by the immediate supervisor and/or the City Mayor.

--- [Page 7] ---
Page 7 of 10
Ordnr No. 0132-03

1. Development Management Officer III

2.a. Assists the Development Management Officer (DMO) IV in formulating measures relevant to gender and development concerns of the City in order to attain gender mainstreaming on local government policies through the conduct of research and other related studies.

2.b. Assists DMO IV in reviewing the City Development Plan and Policies to ensure gender responsive programs of the city by way of facilitating workshops and consultations.

2.c. Supervises the conduct of research and studies and analysis of data gathered in order to develop data bases for Davao City through establishment of data resource materials and electronic data base networks.

2.d. Assists in providing technical assistance to line departments/offices to carry out measures which will ensure effective implementation of gender and development programs of the city by strengthening collaboration among GAD Focal Persons as well as other mechanisms.

2.e. Assists in maintaining collaboration and partnerships among the line departments/ offices, non-government organizations, and other organized women federations/councils in order to maximize potential resources thru effective coordination.

2.f. Assists in evaluating the results of (a) projects/projects and activities of the city for effective implementation of the same thru the conduct of periodic monitoring.

2.g. Performs such other functions as may be directed from time to time by the immediate supervisor and/or the City Mayor.

3. Development Management Officer II (Integrated Gender Coordinative, Monitoring & Evaluation Section)

3.a. Coordinates with network of organizations both from the Government Organizations (GO's) and Non-Government Organizations (NGOs') in the preparation and assessment as well as updating of Davao City Development Plan for women to ensure its implementation at all levels thru meetings, workshops and consultations.

3.b. Formulates research tools for the collection of accurate sex and age disaggregated data annually on poverty, education and in all aspects of economic activities as well as to develop qualitative and quantitative indicators to facilitate the assessment of Davao City's economic performance from a gender perspective thru a facilitative and participative workshop.

3.c. Conducts research to communities as well as policy research to government offices thru various approaches such as interviews, focus group discussion and survey in coordination with NGOs, organized women federation and GAD Focal persons for assessment and evaluation of gender and development programs and policies.

3.d. Develops and initiates advocacy programs to promote women's economic, social and political empowerment by maintaining and strengthening media relations.

--- [Page 8] ---
Page 8 of 10
Ord No. 0132-03
3. a. Prepare accomplishment reports in all activities undertaken by the Integrated Gender Coordinative, Monitoring and Evaluation Section as well as offer monitoring and evaluation reports and submit to the immediate supervisor for review and recommendation.
3. f. Performs other functions as maybe directed from time to time by the immediate supervisor and/or the IIMG IV
4. Development Management Officer II (Integrated Gender Regulatory Section)
4. a. Formulates standards and guidelines for all women's gender and development mechanisms instituted by all establishments and local government agencies and instrumentalizes for effective implementation of GAD programs/projects including proper coordination and effective referral system.
4. b. Proposes mechanisms and appropriate intervention models attending to the overall context of women's specific problems; needs specifically in situations of violence or abuse for the guidance of all women centered programs and services which government or private firm preparation of project proposal/designs to be submitted to the City Mayor thru the EORO IV & III
4. c. Recommends and proposes policy changes to address holistically i.e. the physical, biological, emotional, psychological and social needs specifically thru indigenous approach to women social differentiation by drafting amendments of laws, orders and ordinances
4. d. Conducts orientation and frequent interactive activities to strengthen GAD Focal Person per I.O. 343, Office of the President and Ordinance No. 5004, thru to ensure gender mainstreaming in GAD programs and policies
4. e. Conducts policy studies on existing and proposed laws to ensure effective intervention in policy making in coordination with the Coordinative, Monitoring and Evaluation Section in partnership with other GO's & NGO's.
4. f. Performs other functions as maybe directed from time to time by the immediate supervisor and/or the IIMG IV
5. Development Management Officer I (Integrated Gender Coordinative, Monitoring & Evaluation Section)
5. a. Assists IIMG II in coordinating with networks of organizations both GO's and NGO's in the preparation and assessment as well as updating of Davao City Development Plan for women to ensure its implementation at all levels thru meetings, workshops and consultations.
5. b. Assists IIMG II in the formulation of research tool for the collection of accurate sex and age disaggregated data specifically on poverty situation and in all aspects of economic activities as well as to develop qualitative and quantitative indicators to facilitate the assessment of Davao City's economic performance from a gender perspective through proper and comprehensive documentation.

--- [Page 9] ---
Page 9 of 10
Ord. No. 0132-03

5. c. Assists DMO II in identification, transformation and interpretation of data essential to execution of operation plan, and other office development by way of team coaching approved and by data collection and tabulation.

5. d. Assists DMO II in the preparation of accomplishment reports in all activities undertaken by the Integrated Gender Coordinative, Monitoring and Evaluation Section as well as other monitoring and evaluation reports by encoding and drafting said reports through the use of Computers.

5. e. Follows up on administrative requirements of the activities, projects and program advocacy of the Integrated Gender Development through establishment of linkages and facilitation of documents to ensure that necessary support services are met.

5. f. Coordinates with line departments' offices in the planning management monitoring and evaluation of gender related activities for effective implementation.

5. g. Prepare the document report in the conduct of interviews, focus group discussion and other related research activities for identification of action areas and to have basis for proper and appropriate action and by use of tape encoder.

5. h. Performs staff function and other related duties that may, from time to time be assigned by the superiors.

6. Development Management Officer II (Integrated Gender Regulatory Section)

7. CLERK III

7. a. Receives, releases and records incoming and outgoing communications for proper records management by adopting workable system.

7. b. Types or encodes office correspondence, memoranda, reports, payrolls and other clerical jobs for dissemination, submission and processing using typewriter or computer.

7. c. Performs other tasks and related duties that may, from time to time be assigned by superiors.

SECTION 6. SELECTION OF EMPLOYEES FOR APPOINTMENTS: A person who will be appointed to the career service as part of the Integrated Gender Development Division should meet the maximum qualification standards approved by the Civil Service Commission

In determining the relevance of education and experience requirement, reference shall be made to the duties and responsibilities attached to the positions and the occupational groups.

--- [Page 10] ---
Page 10 of 10
Ord No. 0132-03
Furthermore, selection of employees for appointment in this newly created division shall be open to all qualified men and women according to the principle of merit and fitness. There shall be no discrimination in the selection of employees on account of gender, civil status, disability, religion, ethnicity, or political affiliation.
SECTION 7: Sufficient funds shall be allocated for the creation of the Integrated Gender and Development Division and for the eight (8) plantilla positions under it.
SECTION 8: REPEALING CLAUSE: Sections 28 and 29 of Chapter II, Provisions for Implementation of the Women Development Code and Section 1 of Ordinance No. 2274, otherwise known as "The Stating Pattern and Organizational Structure of the City Government of Davao" is hereby amended or modified accordingly.
SECTION 9: EFFECTIVITY: This Ordinance shall take effect upon approval and after completion of its publication in a newspaper of general circulation in Davao City.
ENACTED, September 2, 2003 by a majority vote of the Members of the Sanggunian.
CERTIFIED CORRECT:
LOHITA C. GARCIA
Secretary to the Sanggunian: Panahonod
(City Government Department Head II)
ATTESIED:
LUCY C. RONGUAN
Vice Mayor
Presiding Officer
cm/nili
APPROVED
003
RODRIGUEZ R. DUTERTE
City Mayor
ATTESIED:
J. MELCHOR V. QUIAN
Acting City Administrator
