=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 000258-09 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
Republic of the Philippines
OFFICE OF THE CITY LEGAL OFFICER
City of Davao

Ref. No. 1131-09

2nd INDORESEMENT
OCTOBER 7, 2009

CITY MAYOR'S OFFICE
DAVAO CITY
RECEIVED

Respectfully forwarded to the Office of the City Mayor, through
the Office of the City Administrator, both this City, the attached
Ordinance No. 02377-09 entitled "THE ANTI-SPLITTING ORDINANCE IN
DAVAO CITY", with the herein findings and recommendation:

The General Welfare Clause of RA 7160, otherwise known as the
Local Government Code authorizes the local government units to pass
ordinances as it deem necessary and proper to provide for the health
and safety, promote the prosperity, improve the morals, peace, good
order, and comfort for its inhabitants and for the protection of its
property.

For an ordinance to be valid, the Supreme Court has consistently
held that it must not be unreasonable, not contravene the constitution
or any statute, not partial or discriminatory, not prohibitory but may
regulate, and it must be consistent with public policy. Unfortunately,
the ordinance fails to meet the same.

Obviously, the subject ordinance was passed to prevent the
spread of airborne disease particularly "Tuberculosis", which is one
health problem besetting our people as shown in Resolution No. 02377-
09.

However, while it appears that the purpose is laudable, this office
finds the ordinance defective. In substance, Section 3 of the subject
ordinance which states that:

"PENHIBITED ACT: No person or persons who shall, carelessly or
intentionally spit saliva, mucus or other substances from the mouth in city
streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks, malls, markets, streets, public carriages, public
bills and buildings, banks, public squares, terminals, shopping and
concessions centers, schools, churches, hospital and other similar public places within the City
of Davao".

It is sweeping, vague, aggressive and unreasonable.

It is vague because a question will arise as to when spitting
prohibited places is carelessly made? Does it cover spitting phlegm
or tissue paper while in a public place?

A question will likewise arise as to whether or not a person
suffering from cough and cold needs to spit his phlegm while within
prohibited places, considered intentional. Assuming that the answer is in
the negative so that the person is exempt from the coverage, then the
measure does not serve the purpose, which is to prevent the spread of

--- [Page 2] ---
airborne diseases. If the answer is in the affirmative, the ordinance becomes oppressive because the person needs to return home or look for private place before he/she could dispose the same.

A vague ordinance is repugnant to the Constitution in two respects: (1) It violates due process for failure to accord persons, specially the parties targeted by it, fair notice of the conduct to avoid; (2) It leaves enforcers unbridled discretion in carrying out its provisions and becomes an arbitrary flexing of the Government muscle.

From the import of the ordinance, it can easily be deduced that the mere act of spitting (Intentionally) of saliva, mucus, or other substance from the mouth in prohibited places under the ordinance is punishable. It is ABSOLUTELY in application.

It is sweeping in that it penalizes for it penalizes the mere act of spitting in the prohibited places. The phrase "in the prohibited places" makes the ordinance ABSOLUTELY in application. It does not matter how it is being done and why it has to be done.

It penalizes whether or not the substance spitted did not fall to the ground having been spitted in the handkerchief, clothes, tissue paper as long as spitting is done in a public places.

It penalizes even if the spitting is made in the garbage bin positioned in the streets/public places by city itself, West, even if the act is made in the rest room inside the malls, public offices, etc., is prohibited in the said ordinance. A person whose tooth was just extracted cannot spit his/her saliva using tissue paper while riding in a public vehicle.

In the situation thus obtaining, the ordinance becomes oppressive, unreasonable if not ridiculous. Common experience tells us that there are compelling reasons that prompt a person to spit while in public places, without offending ethics, morals and health of the public. With the ordinance, a person who needs to spit has to return home or to look for private place to spit.

An ordinance is said to be reasonable if the means adopted is appropriate to the accomplishment of the purpose for which the police power is exercised.

The ordinance treated those with tuberculosis and the healthy one alike, which unreasonableness and violative of the equal protection clause. If the purpose of the ordinance is to prevent spreading of airborne diseases, only those who are carrier of airborne diseases that should be prohibited.

Common experience tells us that there are compelling reasons that prompted a person to spit while in public places, without offending ethics, morals and health of the public. With the ordinance, a healthy person who needs to spit has to return home or look for private place to spit, which makes the ordinance oppressive.

--- [Page 3] ---
If this office has to expand its imagination, a person who happens to eat spoiled food inside the mall will be forced to swallow the same, for if he/she spits the food, liability sets in under the said ordinance.
IN VIEW THEREOF, it is recommended that the subject ordinance be vetoed.
ATTY. MABJUSA A. GALLO, RSW
Legal Officer 1V
This is to certify that this legal opinion was arrived at solely by the undersigned based on the facts and issues presented/submitted in relation to applicable laws and jurisprudence.
ATTY. MARISA A. GALLO, RSW
Approved:
ATTY. OSMUNDO P. VILLANUEVA, JR
Acting Ass't-City Legal Officer
Date of Approval: October 7, 2009
Date received by the Office: October 2, 2009
Date received by the lawyer: October 2, 2009

--- [Page 4] ---
15th City Council
31st Regular Session
Series of 2009
Republica ng: Pilipinas
SANGUNIANG PAMBANGSOD
Lungsod ng Dabaw
PRESENT
President Pro Tempore
Councillor Ma. Belen S. Acosta
Councillor Nilo G. Abelerra
Councillor Victorio S. Advancula Sr.
Councillor Wilberto E. Al-ag
Councillor Dante L. Apostol Sr.
Councillor Leonard R. Avida III
Councillor Manuel M. Andaluan
Councillor Samuel B. Bangoy
Councillor Karlo S. Bella
Councillor Louis John J. Bonguyan
Councillor Plar C. Braga
Councillor Arnolfo Ricardo B. Cabling
Councillor Danilo C. Dayangsangang
Councillor Mariano F. Delaorte
Councillor Edgar R. Ibuayan
Councillor Peter T. Lavina
Councillor Diosdado Angelo A. Mahipus Sr.
Councillor Teresita C. Mata-Marathon
Councillor Bonifacio E. Militar
Councillor Jose Luis M. Molle IV
Councillor Myrna G. I. Daledo-Ortiz
Councillor Susan Isabel C. Reta
Councillor Hallia Y. Sudagay
Councillor Angeda A. Librado Trinidad
Councillor Jose Leonel Bustamante
Councillor Judita P. Zozibrad
ON OFFICIAL BUSINESS:
Vice Mayor Sara Z. Duterte
ORDINANCE NO. 0258-09
Series of 2009
AN ORDINANCE PROHIBITING SPITTING IN
PUBLIC PLACES AND PROVIDING
PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS THEREOF
Be it ordained by the Sangguniang Panlungsod of Davao City in session assembled that:
SECTION 1. TITLE: This Ordinance shall be known as "THE
ANTI-SPITTING ORDINANCE OF DAVAO CITY".

--- [Page 5] ---
Page 2 of 3
Ord No 0258-09

SECTION 2. DEFINITION OF TERMS: For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following shall be defined as follows:

a) Spit or Spitting refers to the careless or intentional act of ejecting saliva, phlegm, mucus or other substances from the mouth.

b) Public Place refers to any place open to the public such as, but not limited to, streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks, malls, markets, streets, public carriers, public halls and buildings, banks, public squares, terminals, shopping and business centers, schools, churches and hospitals within the City of Davao;

SECTION 3. PROHIBITED ACT: No person or persons shall, carelessly or intentionally spit saliva, phlegm, mucus or other substances from the mouth in city streets, alleys, sidewalks, parks, malls, markets, streets, public carriers, public halls and buildings, banks, public squares, terminals, shopping and business centers, schools, churches, hospitals and other similar public places within the City of Davao;

SECTION 4. PERSONS LIABLE: The person or persons who committed the prohibited Act as defined under Section 3 hereof shall be deemed liable under this Ordinance;

SECTION 5. PENALTIES: Any violation of this Ordinance shall be penalized by a fine of One Hundred (P100.00) Pesos for the first offense; Two Hundred (P200.00) Pesos for the second offense; and Three Hundred (P300.00) Pesos for the third offense or a subsidiary imprisonment not exceeding six (6) months in case of indigency, or both such fine and imprisonment at the discretion of the court;

SECTION 6. INFORMATION DISSEMINATION: The City Health Office is tasked to implement information dissemination campaigns on the effects of spitting on the health and welfare of the constituents of Davao City, within three (3) months from the effectivity of this Ordinance and every year thereafter;

SECTION 7. SEPARABILITY CLAUSE: If for any reason or reasons, any part or provision of this ordinance shall be held unconstitutional or invalid, other parts or provisions thereof which are not affected thereby shall continue to be in full force and effect;

SECTION 8. EFFECTIVITY: This Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Davao.

--- [Page 6] ---
Page 3 of 3
Ord. No. 0258-09

ENACTED, August 25, 2009 by a majority vote of all the Members of
the Sangguniang Panlungsod.
(Note: Councilors Dante L. Apostol Sr. and Myrna G. L'Dalode-
Ortiz were out when this ordinance was approved.)
CERTIFIED CORRECT:
ZULEIKA T. LOPEZ
Secretary to the Sangguniang Panlungsod
(City Government Department Head II)
ATTESTED
MA. BELENS S. ACOSTA
President Pro Tempore
Temporary Presiding Officer
ATTESTED
WENDEL E AVISADO
City Administrator
