=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 0258-23 Data Privacy Ordinance ===

--- [Page 1] ---
Republic of the Philippines
Office of the Sangguniang Panlungsod
City of Davao

20th City Council
26th Regular Session
Series of 2023

Present:
Vice Mayor
Councillor

--- [Page 2] ---
Page 2 of 9

Ord. No. 0258-23

Be it ordained by the Sangguniang Panlungsod of Davao City in session assembled, that:

SECTION I. TITLE - This Ordinance shall be known as "AN ORDINANCE ORGANIZING REPUBLIC ACT NO. 10173 OR THE DATA PRIVACY ACT OF 2012 IN THE CITY GOVERNMENT OF DAVAO (ALSO KNOWN AS THE DATA PRIVACY ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF DAVAO), PROVIDING GUIDELINES AND FUNDS THEREFOR".

SECTION 2. DEFINITION OF TERMS. The terms used in the Data Privacy Act (DPA) and its Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR), as amended, are adopted herein.

SECTION 3. COVERAGE. This Ordinance shall cover all departments and offices under the City Government of Davao.

SECTION 4. GENERAL DUTIES AND OBLIGATIONS. The following are the general duties and obligations of the City Government of Davao as a Personal Information Controller (PIC):

A. Personal data shall be processed for purposes of facilitating the performance of its public functions and the provision of public services pursuant to its mandate. In all instances, it shall adhere to the general data privacy principles of transparency, legitimate purpose, and proportionality;

B. Reasonable and appropriate safeguards shall be implemented for the protection of personal data of data subjects of the CITY GOVERNMENT OF DAVAO, whether internal (officials, employees, job order, contract of service, casual, etc.) or external (clients, visitors, other stakeholders, etc.).

C. The rights of the data subjects shall be upheld, subject to limitations as may be provided for by law. The free exercise of applicable rights shall be enabled through mechanisms that are clear, simple, straightforward, and convenient for the data subjects;

D. The data privacy rights of the affected data subjects shall be harmonized with the right to information on matters of public concern. It is recognized that both rights are imperative for transparent, accountable, and participatory governance, and are key factors for effective and reasonable public participation in social, political, and economic decision-making.

SECTION 5. SPECIFIC COMPLIANCE REQUIREMENTS. The following specific compliance requirements under the DPA, its IRR as amended, and relevant issuances of the National Privacy Commission (NPC), are hereby set out as follows:

A. Designation of Persons Responsible. Pursuant to Section 21 of the DPA, PICs shall designate individual(s) who shall facilitate and ensure the PIC's responsibility and accountability for the organization's compliance with the DPA. The following are hereby designated:

A.1. Data Protection Officer (DPO). The City Mayor shall designate the DPO, through a memorandum, tasked with the duties and responsibilities of ensuring the compliance of the City Government of Davao with the DPA, its IRR, and other NPC issuances.

--- [Page 3] ---
Page 3 of 9
Ord. No. 0258-23

It shall have the following functions:

a. Monitor the Personal Information Controllers (PICs) or Personal Information Processors (PIPs) compliance with the Data Privacy Act (DPA), its implementing Rules & Regulations (IRR), issuances by the National Privacy Commission (NPC) and other applicable laws and policies. For this purpose, he or she may:
i. Collect information to identify the processing operations, activities, measures, projects, programs, or systems of the PIC or PIP, and maintain a record thereof;
ii. Analyze and check the compliance of processing activities, including the issuance of security clearances and compliance by third-party service providers;
iii. Inform, advise, and issue recommendations to the PIC or PIP;
iv. Ascertain renewal of accreditations or certifications necessary to maintain the required standards in personal data processing;
v. Advise the PIC or PIP as regards the necessity of executing a Data Sharing Agreement with third parties, and ensure its compliance with law.

b. Ensure the conduct of Privacy Impact Assessments (PIA) relative to activities, measures, projects, programs, or systems of the PIC or PIP;

c. Ensure proper data breach and security incident management by the PIC or PIP, including the latter's preparation and submission to the NPC of reports and other documentation concerning security incidents or data breaches within the prescribed period;

d. Inform and cultivate awareness on privacy and data protection within the organization of the PIC or PIP, including all relevant laws, rules, and regulations and issuances of the NPC;

e. Advocate for the development, review, and/or revision of policies, guidelines, projects, and/or programs of the PIC or PIP relating to privacy and data protection, by adopting a privacy by design approach;

f. Serve as the contact person of the PIC or PIP vis-à-vis data subjects, the NPC, and other authorities in all matters concerning data privacy, security issues or concerns of the PIC or PIP;

--- [Page 4] ---
Page 4 of 9
Ord. No. 0258-23

h. Cooperate, coordinate, and seek the advice of the NPC regarding matters concerning data privacy and security;
i. Perform other duties and tasks that may be assigned by the PIC or PIP that will further the interest of data privacy and security and uphold the rights of the data subjects;
j. The DPO or his or her authorized representative/s shall create the necessary user accounts in the applicable NCP system/s in compliance with the requirements for registration and personal data breach notification and management;
k. The contact details of the DPO should be made available and easily accessible on the official website and social media pages and should include the following information:
a. Title or designation - the name of the DPO need not be published but should be made available upon request by a data subject;
b. Postal address; and
c. Dedicated telephone number and email address.

The designated DPO shall be assisted by Compliance Officers for Privacy (COPs) and Data Privacy Committee created herein.

A.2 Compliance Officer for Privacy (COP) - There shall be a Compliance Officer for Privacy (COP) per office, one (1) primary and one (1) alternate, who must be a Plantilla personnel and duly covered by a memorandum from the Human Resource Management Office.

Functions:

1. Report to the DPO any data breach and security incident within the prescribed period;

2. Inform and cultivate awareness on privacy and data protection within their respective offices;

3. Suggest to the DPO the development, review and/or revision of policies, guidelines, projects and/or programs of the PIC or PIP relating to privacy and data protection;

4. Serve as the focal person of their respective offices in all matters concerning data privacy or security issues;

5. Perform other duties and tasks that may be assigned by the DPO that will further the interest of data privacy and security and uphold the rights of the data subjects.

--- [Page 5] ---
Page 5 of 9
Ord. No. 0258-23

A.3 Data Privacy Committee-The Data Privacy Committee (herein after referred to as the "Committee" for brevity) shall be primarily composed of the duly appointed representatives of the following offices:

Chairperson:
City Mayor's Office

Vice Chairperson:
City Legal Office

Members:
• City Administrator's Office
• City Information and Technology Center
• City Archives and Records Office
• City Civil Registrar's Office
• Sangguniang Panlungsod, Committee on Information Technology
• Human Resource Management Office
• City Social Welfare and Development Office
• City Health Office

The City Mayor may, through an Executive Order, add additional members to the Committee, as may be deemed necessary.

The members of the Data Privacy Committee shall perform functions as may be instructed by the City Mayor and/or the DPO, such as but not limited to, reviewing contracts involving processing of personal data and provide technical advice to the DPO based on their areas of expertise.

The presence of a simple majority of all the members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum.

B. Conduct of Privacy Impact Assessment: All departments and offices as process owners shall conduct a Privacy Impact Assessment (PIA) on any personal data processing system prior to their adoption, use, or implementation.

1. For existing systems, the DPO shall be consulted by the respective process owners on the appropriateness of conducting a PIA and the reasonable timeframe to accomplish the same;

2. For both existing and proposed systems, there may be a determination that the conduct of a PIA is not necessary if the processing involves minimal risks to the rights and freedoms of data subjects, taking into account the recommendations from the DPO. In making this determination, the following should be considered:

a. Size and sensitivity of the personal data being processed;

b. Duration and extent of processing;

c. Likely impact of the processing to the life of the data subject; and

d. Possible harm in case of a personal data breach;

--- [Page 6] ---
Page 6 of 9
Ord. No. 0258-23

3. The conduct of a PIA may be outsourced to a third-party service provider, as may be recommended by the DPO subject to the laws, rules, and regulations applicable to government procurement;

4. The relevant issuances and other information, education, and communication materials of the NPC or FIA and other relevant issuances shall serve as additional guidance;

5. The results of the PIA conducted shall be made the basis for the preparation of the Privacy Management Program, the Privacy Manual, and the crafting of the appropriate privacy notices specific to the personal data processing activities being undertaken by the pertinent departments and offices and other applicable policies relevant to data privacy and security.

C. Adoption of a Privacy Management Program and Privacy Manual:

The City Government of Davao shall prepare a Privacy Management Program, which shall contain, among others, the necessary policies and processes that remediate the gaps identified in the PIA and a Privacy Manual, as may be supplemented by the existing or prospective guides, manuals, privacy notices, ordinances, policies, and other documented information on processes that may deal with any data privacy matter.

1. The DPO, the Committee, and the CPDs shall be tasked to ensure that all relevant records and other documentation on data privacy are maintained and kept up to date;

2. The Privacy Management Program and Privacy Manual shall be subject to regular review, evaluation, and updating, where appropriate, considering the best practices and national and/or international standards for data privacy and security.

D. Implementation of Security Measures:

Reasonable and appropriate organizational, technical, and physical security measures shall be implemented by all departments and offices processing personal data.

1. The determination of what is reasonable and appropriate shall take into account the following factors as determined following the PIA conducted:

a. Nature and volume of the personal data to be protected;

b. Risks of the processing to the involved data subjects;

c. Size of the department or office and complexity of its personal data processing activities;

d. Current data privacy best practices;

e. Cost of implementation.

--- [Page 7] ---
Page 7 of 9
Ord. No. 0258-23

2. The security measures to be implemented shall ensure the protection of personal data against any unlawful processing and the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of the personal data being processed. The DPO, in consultation and coordination with the City Information and Technology Center, in the case of a digital-based or electronic systems, and the City Archives and Records Office, in the case of paper-based systems, shall develop, determine, and recommend on the measures and policies to be implemented. These may include back-up solutions, access controls, secure log files, acceptable use, encryption, and data disposal mechanisms, among others, for any personal data processing activity.

3. The data sharing and outsourcing arrangements shall be subject to the execution of the appropriate agreements as may be determined by the Committee in consultation with the DPO. For this purpose, the relevant issuances of the NPC shall be observed accordingly.

E. Security Incident Management: Personal Data Breach Management

The following policies and procedures are set out for purposes of managing security incidents, including personal data breaches.

1. Data Breach Response Team (DBRT): A data breach response team is hereby created with the following members: the DPO and the Data Privacy Committee.

The DBRT shall be responsible for the following actions:

a. Assess and evaluate all security incidents, including personal data breaches;

b. Restore integrity to the affected information and communications systems;

c. Recommend measures for mitigation and remedies on any resulting damage to the CITY GOVERNMENT OF DAVAO and the affected data subjects;

d. Comply with the mandatory notification and other reporting requirements indicated in the appropriate NPC issuance;

e. Coordinate with the appropriate government Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT) and law enforcement agencies, where appropriate.

2. Incident Response Procedure: The DBRT shall recommend the actual procedure or manual for the timely discovery and management of security incidents. This shall include:

a. Identification of person(s) responsible for regular monitoring and evaluation of security incidents;

b. Reporting lines in the event of a personal data breach;

--- [Page 8] ---
Page 8 of 9
Ord. No. 0258-23

c. Evaluation of the security incidents or personal data breaches as to its nature, extent and cause, the adequacy of safeguards in place, immediate and long-term impact of the personal data breach, and its actual and potential harm and negative consequences to affected data subjects;

d. Procedures for contacting law enforcement, if necessary;

e. Conduct of investigations on the security incident, including personal data breaches;

f. Procedures for notifying the NPC and data subjects when the personal data breach is subject to mandatory notification requirements;

g. Procedures in assisting affected data subjects to mitigate the possible harm and negative consequences in the event of a personal data breach.

SECTION 6. RIGHTS OF DATA SUBJECTS - MECHANISM FOR THE EXERCISE OF RIGHTS: The relevant NPC issuances on data subject rights, the guidance on transparency, procedures for the exercise of rights, and appropriate templates indicated therein, are hereby adopted.

SECTION 7. REMEDIES: The DPO, in coordination with the Committee and the concerned department or office as process owners, as represented by their respective COPs, shall endeavor to address and resolve all data subject complaints, complaints, concerns, questions, and requests regarding the processing of their personal data, complaints, personal data breaches, and similar matters without undue delay, following the applicable provisions of Republic Act No. 11032 or the "Ease of Doing Business and Efficient Government Service Delivery Act of 2018" and its Implementing Rules and Regulations.

SECTION 8. INTERPRETATION: Any doubt in the interpretation of any provision of this Ordinance and corresponding policies shall be construed in a manner that accords the highest respect for data privacy, and liberally interpreted in a manner mindful of the rights and interest of data subjects.

SECTION 9. FUNDING: The City Government of Davao shall ensure the provision of the necessary funds to support the full implementation of this Ordinance.

SECTION 10. SEPARABILITY CLAUSE: If any section or part of this Ordinance is held unconstitutional or invalid, other sections or provisions hereof not otherwise affected shall remain in full force or effect.

SECTION 11. REPEALING CLAUSE: All other Ordinances, orders, issuances, rules and regulations, which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

SECTION 12. EFFECTIVITY: This Ordinance shall take effect fifteen (15) days after publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Davao.

--- [Page 9] ---
Page 9 of 9
Ord. No. 0258-23

ENACTED, July 11, 2023, by a unanimous vote of all the Members of the Sanggunian, there being a quorum.

CERTIFIED CORRECT:
For and in the absence of the Secretary:

MA. THERESA A. REYES
Acting Secretary to the Sanggunian Pan lungsod
(City Government Assistant Department Head III)

ATTESTED:

J. MELCHOR B. QUITAIN JR.
Vice Mayor
Presiding Officer
cns/ser

APPROVED: OCT 10 2023, 2023

SEBASTIAN Z. DUTERTE
City Mayor

ATTESTED:

ATTY. FRANCIS MARK H. LAYOG
Acting City Administrator

AN ORDINANCE ORGANIZING REPUBLIC ACT NO. 10173 OR THE DATA PRIVACY ACT OF 2012 IN THE CITY GOVERNMENT OF DAVAO (ALSO KNOWN AS THE DATA PRIVACY ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF DAVAO), PROVIDING GUIDELINES AND FINEs THEREFOR
