=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance no. 040-99 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
Page 1 of 5

Republika ng Pilipinas
SANGUNIANG PANLUNGSOD
Lungsod ng Davao
Twelfth City Council
30th Regular Session

ORDINANCE NO. 040
Series of 1999

AN ORDINANCE AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 37,
 SERIES OF 1956, OTHER THAN SECTION 18, AN
 ORDINANCE REGULATING THE ESTABLISHMENT,
 MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION OF BARS IN THE
 CITY OF DAVAO

Be it ordained by the Sangguniang Panlungsod of
Davao City in session assembled:

SECTION 1. Sections 1, 2, J, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 11,
13 and 14 of Ordinance No. 37, Series of 1956 are
hereby amended to read as follows:

"SECTION 1. Definition - A "Bar" shall include any
place or establishment whose principal business is the
sale of alcoholic beverages or liquors of any kind to be used and consumed within its premises. A hideout
bar shall include in the definition of bar. A bar
that allows dancing within its premises shall be
subject to the provisions of Ordinance No. 37, Series
of 1956 (as amended by Ordinance No. 40, Series of
1964).

"SECTION 2. Location - No bar shall be established
within a radius of 100 linear meters from the perimeter
fence of any public building, school, public library,
church or hospital.

This provision as to location shall not apply to those
bars licensed and operating at the time of the approval
of this Ordinance, nor will the opening of any public
building or other premises from which distance that
would interfere with the normal operation of such
bar operating. Provided however, that such bar established within 100 linear meters from any school, hospital, public library or church, shall be
the only bar permitted in such area. It shall be so that
the noise coming therefrom shall not disturb those in the
school, hospital, public library or church, and if such noise causes
such disturbances then such bar shall operate on the
following time as specified under Section 4 hereof."

--- [Page 2] ---
Page 2 of 5

SECTION 3. Building Requirements - Bars shall be well lighted at all times leaving no dark corners and shall be maintained under good sanitary condition. There shall be no private rooms nor separate compartments in any bar except for a signatory or manager's room where liquors are on display, owner or manager's room, dressing room for ladies and kitchen.

SECTION 4. Bars Established Prior to the Effective Date of this Ordinance - For bars constructed, operated and licensed within a radius of 100 linear meters from the perimeter fence of any public building, school, public library, church or hospital prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall begin its business hours as herein provided.

For bars located near a school:

a.1. Start of operation shall be at 9:30 p.m. for those bars located near colleges and universities;

a.2. Start of operation shall be at 8:00 p.m. for those bars located near schools offering only elementary and secondary education, provided, however, if the schools offer evening classes then the bar can start to operate only at 9:30 p.m. or 2:00 a.m.;

b) For bars located near a public library, they can start to operate only after its library hours;

c) For bars located near a hospital, they can start to operate only at 6:00 p.m.;

d) For bars located near a church, they can start to operate only when there are no religious activities or services going on.

SECTION 5. Restriction to persons - (a) Minors eighteen years of age, persons carrying deadly weapons, persons wearing multiple peace officers in proper police uniform especially detailed therein to keep order and those on special mission to apprehend criminals and other law violators, and intoxicated persons who have been served and are allowed to remain in any bars, cabarets, dancing schools, or dance halls Provided, however, that other peace officers who do not qualify therefor in accordance with order and those who have no mission to perform in said places of amusement and private persons holding firearms shall deposit the same with the management upon entering the premises. No smoking or drinking of any kind is to be placed at the main entrance of the amusement places. RIFLEMS ARE NOT ALLOWED AND DEPOSIT YOUR FIREARMS WITH THE MANAGEMENT. (As amended by Ordinance No. 19, Series of 1950.)

--- [Page 3] ---
Page 3 of 5

(b) No person shall be employed as an entertainer, drink or food server in any bar unless he/she is at least twenty-one years of age and without first having obtained from the City Mayor or his designee with the approval of the Chief of Police, a medical certificate that he/she is free from contagious or infectious diseases. For this purpose, the corresponding birth certificate duly authenticated by the National Statistics Office (NSO) must be presented and submitted, that with the written consent of his/her parents or guardian if he/she is under eighteen years of age, and that of his/her father or mother if he/she is under twenty-one years may be so employed. No entertainer or drink or food server shall be allowed to continue working as such, during disciplinary suspension, or after conviction for any disorderly conduct, except in cases where he/she is suffering from any contagious or infectious diseases or after conviction for any disorderly conduct, except in cases where he/she is suffering from any contagious or infectious diseases or after conviction for any disorderly conduct, except in cases where he/she is suffering from any contagious or infectious diseases or after conviction for any disorderly conduct, except in cases where he/she is suffering from any contagious or infectious diseases or after conviction for any disorderly conduct, except in cases where he/she is suffering from any contagious or infectious diseases or after conviction for any disorderly conduct, except in cases where he/she is suffering from any contagious or infectious diseases or after conviction for any disorderly conduct, except in cases where he/she is suffering from any contagious or infectious diseases or after conviction for any disorderly conduct, except in cases where he/she is suffering from any contagious or infectious diseases or after conviction for any disorderly conduct, except in cases where he/she is suffering from any contagious or infectious diseases or after conviction for any disorderly conduct, except in cases where he/she is suffering from any contagious or infectious diseases or after conviction for any disorderly conduct, except in cases where he/she is suffering from any contagious or infectious diseases or after conviction for any disorderly conduct, except in cases where he/she is suffering from any contagious or infectious diseases or after conviction for any disorderly conduct, except in cases where he/she is suffering from any contagious or infectious diseases or after conviction for any disorderly conduct, except in cases where he/she is suffering from any contagious or infectious diseases or after conviction for any disorderly conduct, except in cases where he/she is suffering from any contagious or infectious diseases or after conviction for any disorderly conduct, except in cases where he/she is suffering from any contagious or infectious diseases or after conviction for any disorderly conduct, except in cases where he/she is suffering from any contagious or infectious diseases or after conviction for any disorderly conduct, except in cases where he/she is suffering from any contagious or infectious diseases or after conviction for any disorderly conduct, except in cases where he/she is suffering from any contagious or infectious diseases or after conviction for any disorderly conduct, except in cases where he/she is suffering from any contagious or infectious diseases or after conviction for any disorderly conduct, except in cases where he/she is suffering from any contagious or infectious diseases or after conviction for any disorderly conduct, except in cases where he/she is suffering from any contagious or infectious diseases or after conviction for any disorderly conduct, except in cases where he/she is suffering from any contagious or infectious diseases or after conviction for any disorderly conduct, except in cases where he/she is suffering from any contagious or infectious diseases or after conviction for any disorderly conduct, except in cases where he/she is suffering from any contagious or infectious diseases or after conviction for any disorderly conduct, except in cases where he/she is suffering from any contagious or infectious diseases or after conviction for any disorderly conduct, except in cases where he/she is suffering from any contagious or infectious diseases or after conviction for any disorderly conduct, except in cases where he/she is suffering from any contagious or infectious diseases or after conviction for any disorderly conduct, except in cases where he/she is suffering from any contagious or infectious diseases or after conviction for any disorderly conduct, except in cases where he/she is suffering from any contagious or infectious diseases or after conviction for any disorderly conduct, except in cases where he/she is suffering from any contagious or infectious diseases or after conviction for any disorderly conduct, except in cases where he/she is suffering from any contagious or infectious diseases or after conviction for any disorderly conduct, except in cases where he/she is suffering from any contagious or infectious diseases or after conviction for any disorderly conduct, except in cases where he/she is suffering from any contagious or infectious diseases or after conviction for any disorderly conduct, except in cases where he/she is suffering from any contagious or infectious diseases or after conviction for any disorderly conduct, except in cases where he/she is suffering from any contagious or infectious diseases or after conviction for any disorderly conduct, except in

--- [Page 4] ---
Page 4 of 5

entertainer, drink or food server to be allowed to work in the aforesaid premises without an amendment unless he or she shall have provided and submitted the papers herein required. In cases where no birth certificate is available, a certificate from the Local Health Registrar where the person is supposed to have been born together with affidavit of two interested persons attesting to the birth of the person must be submitted.

SECTION 9. Complaints - Any person who believes that the bar is established or located in any place not authorized by this Ordinance or is not operating or conducting business in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance may file a complaint with the Office of the Chief of the Business Bureau who will recommend to the City Mayor the cancellation of the permit or both the permit and the license after proper investigation and decision is made on the complaint.

SECTION 10. Prices of Drinks - The operator is required to post on a conspicuous place inside the hall a bill board showing the different kinds of drinks for sale and their respective prices for the information of the customers.

SECTION 11. Revocation of Permit - The City Mayor shall revoke any permit or license granted under these regulations upon satisfactory evidence that the use of illegal drugs and gambling or playing of any prohibited game has taken or is taking place within the premises of any bar.

SECTION 12. Violation of Regulations - In case of violation of any of these regulations, the permit for the operation of a bar shall be withdrawn by the City Mayor and the license revoked. Such revocation of the permit and license shall operate to forfeit to the City all sum paid therefore.

SECTION 13. Penal Provisions:

a. Bar operators and owners who are found to have violated any provision of this ordinance shall be made to pay a fine of Pesos: Five Thousand ($5,000.00) or by imprisonment of not less than six (6) months but not more than one (1) year or both such fine and imprisonment at the discretion of the court;

b. AFF and PNB personnel who are found to have violated Sec. 5 of this Ordinance shall be made to pay a fine of Pesos: Five Thousand ($5,000.00) or by imprisonment of not less than six (6) months but not more than one (1) year or both such fine and imprisonment at the discretion of the court.

--- [Page 5] ---
Page 5 of 5

1. Any person found to have violated any provision of this Ordinance shall be fined in the amount of $250, or in the amount of five thousand ($5,000.00) or by imprisonment of not less than six (6) months but not more than one (1) year or both such fine and imprisonment at the discretion of the court.

SECTION 2. REPEALING CLAUSE: Ordinance No. 37, Series of 1958, otherwise known as "An Ordinance Regulating the Establishment, Maintenance and Operation of Bars in the City of Davao" is hereby amended and/or modified accordingly to this effect.

SECTION 3. EFFECTIVITY: This Ordinance shall take effect upon its approval and after the required publication in a newspaper of general circulation.

ENACTED, September 7, 1979, by a majority vote of all the Members of the Sangguniang Panlungsod.

CERTIFIED CORRECT:

LOLITA G. GARCIA
Acting Secretary
Sangguniang Panlungsod

ATTESTED:

CLEMENTE A. E. CATALDO
City Councilor
Acting Presiding Officer

APPROVED:
1999

ATTESTED:

ESTHER M. LIESMA
City Administrator
