=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 000420-20 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
Republic of the Philippines
CITY OF DAVAO
Office of the Sangguniang Panlungsod

19th City Council
42nd Regular Session
Series of 2020

PRESENT:
Councilor Edgar P. Ibayan Jr.
Vice Mayor Sebastian Z. Duterte
Councilor Ralph O. Abella
Councilor Maria P. Abellera
Councilor Maria Belen S. Acosta
Councilor Bai Hundra Cassandra Dominique N. Advincula
Councilor Wilberto D. Af-ag
Councilor Dante R. Aponte Sr.
Councilor Conrado C. Baluran
Councilor Jessica M. Bonguyan
Councilor Louie John J. Bonguyan
Councilor Pilar C. Braga
Councilor Augusto Javier G. Campos III
Councilor Danilo C. Dayanghiran
Councilor Eduardo C. Dayay
Councilor Edwin A. Dela Cruz Sr.
Councilor Richlyn N. Justol-Baguilod
Councilor Pamela A. Librado-Morata
Councilor Diosdado Angelo Junico R. Mahipus
Councilor Jaffar U. Marohomsalic
Councilor Bonifacio E. Militar
Councilor Guillermo M. Montes Jr. Orti
Councilor Antoinette G. Principe-Castrodes
Councilor J. Melchor B. Quitain Jr.
Councilor Alberto T. Ungab
Councilor Mary Josele D. Villafuerte
Councilor Jesus Joseph P. Zozobrado III

ORDINANCE NO. 0420-20
Series of 2020

AN ORDINANCE MANDATING THE STRICT IMPLEMENTATION OF SOCIAL OR PHYSICAL DISTANCING OF PEOPLE AND OTHER RELEVANT MEASURES TO CURE THE SPREAD OF COVID - 19 DISEASE IN THE CITY OF DAVAO, PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION THEREOF AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

--- [Page 2] ---
Page 2 of 7
Ord. No. 0420-20

Be it ordained by the Honorable Sangguniang Panlungsod of Davao City, in session assembled, that:

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE - This Ordinance shall be known as the "Davao City Minimum Health Protocols for COVID-19 Ordinance."

SECTION 2. DEFINITION OF TERMS

a. Confirmed Case - A person may be considered a "confirmed case" of COVID-19 only if he/she was tested at a national or subnational reference laboratory, or at a DOH-certified laboratory testing facility. This is regardless of whether the person shows clinical signs and symptoms of COVID-19.

b. Community Quarantine - A measure taken to mitigate the spread of disease from one community to the other.

c. Frontliners - include officers and members of the Philippine National Police (PNP), Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP), Philippine Coast Guard (PCG), including barangay officials and members of tanod and other offices, agencies and instrumentalities of the government rendering emergency frontliner services, border control, and other critical services.

d. Isolation - refers to the separation of a person or people known or reasonably believed to have been infected or contagious from those who are not infected in order to prevent the spread of disease. Isolation may be voluntary, or compelled by government or public health authorities.

e. Other Frontliners - shall include service workers in private establishments providing basic necessities such as public markets, supermarkets, grocery convenience stores, hospitals, medical clinics, pharmacies and drug stores, food preparation and delivery services, water refilling stations, manufacturing and processing plants of basic food products and medicines, banks, money transfer services, power, energy, water and telecommunication supplies and other facilities.

f. Probable Case - a "probable case" of COVID-19 is:

1. A suspect case who has been tested for COVID-19 but the results are inconclusive.

2. A suspect case who has tested positive for COVID-19 but the test was not conducted at a national or subnational coronavirus reference laboratory, or an officially accredited laboratory for confirmatory testing.

g. Quarantine - refers to the separation of a person or people known or reasonably believed to have been exposed to a communicable disease but not yet symptomatic from others who have not been so exposed in order to prevent the spread of the disease.

h. Social Distancing - is a set of non-therapeutic interventions (NRT) or measures taken to prevent the spread of a contagious disease by maintaining a physical distance between people and reducing the number of times people come into close contact with each other - with the recommended distance being one (1) to two (2) meters.

--- [Page 3] ---
Page 3 of 7
Ord. No. 0420-20

i. Suspect Case - the following may be considered a "suspect case" of COVID
19:
1. A person with severe acute respiratory illness - fever 38°C or higher, cough or sore throat, shortness of breath, and may even include severe pneumonia - whose cause is undetermined prior to testing for coronavirus.
2. A person with influenza - like illness - fever of 38°C or higher, and cough or sore throat - and who lives in or has traveled to an area that reported local transmission of the coronavirus during the 14 days prior to the onset of symptoms.
3. A person with influenza - like illness and has had contact with a confirmed or probable case (see definition of "probable case") of COVID - 19 in two days prior to the onset of that confirmed/probable case's illness or before that confirmed/probable case showed negative on repeat testing.
4. A person with fever or cough or shortness of breath or other respiratory symptoms and is one of the following: 60 years old or older; with a comorbidity or pre-existing illness; in high-risk pregnancy; a health worker.

SECTION 3. SOCIAL DISTANCING IN THE FOLLOWING PLACES - Social distancing of at least one (1) meter (3 feet) radius from one person to another shall be strictly observed in the following places:

a. Inside and outside of the business establishments, markets, pharmacies, banks, remittance centers, medical and quarantine facilities, private and government offices and other institutions authorized or allowed to operate under Community Quarantine.

b. Entry/exit points, checkpoints, roads or alleys in the Barangays, subdivisions or villages.

SECTION 4. PERSONS RESPONSIBLE - The owner, president, general manager, or such other officer - in charge of the areas mentioned in Section 3 shall designate adequate security or frontline personnel to ensure the proper observance of social distancing of people within their premises. The Barangay Health Emergency Response Teams shall take the lead in enforcing minimum health protocols in the barangays and shall be responsible in inspecting establishments for proper compliance, dissemination of information on minimum health protocols, and implement the aims of this Ordinance in their areas of concern.

SECTION 5. SOCIAL DISTANCING MEASURES AND COMMUNITY QUARANTINE GUIDELINES

a. Classes - Classes and all school activities in all levels in the City shall remain suspended until lifted by proper authorities. The City Government shall ensure that students remain in their homes during the class suspension.

--- [Page 4] ---
Page 4 of 7
Ord. No. 0420-20
b. Mass gatherings – Mass gatherings such as movie screenings, concerts, sporting events, and other leisure/entertainment activities, community assemblies, including religious activities and non-essential work-related gatherings are generally prohibited, except when expressly allowed by proper authority. Essential work-related activities may continue as long as strict social distancing, defined as the radial maintenance of a distance of at least one (1) meter from each person and among those present, is maintained during the entire assembly.
c. Community Quarantine – The City Government shall abide by the directives of the Department of Health (DOH) and the Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG) in the imposition of Community Quarantine in their respective jurisdictions. Subject to qualifications that the Inter Agency Task Force (IATF) may further provide, all areas under Community Quarantine shall implement the following:
1. Restrict the non-essential entry of people to the subject area, especially persons who are susceptible to infection (those 60 years old and above, immunocompromised, or with comorbidities), and personnel working except the following: a) health workers/frontliners, b) authorized government officials, c) those travelling for medical or humanitarian reasons, d) persons providing basic services and public utilities, and e.) essential workforce in the City Government;
2. Restrict the non-essential exit of people out of the subject area, except: a) Health workers/frontliners b) authorized government officials, and those traveling for medical or humanitarian reasons, c) persons allowed to travel due to necessities.
d. Work arrangements – Alternative working arrangements, including but not limited to, work from home, and creation of skeleton workforce, may be implemented in the City. Flexible work arrangements are also encouraged in the private sector. For this purpose, the pertinent advisories of the Department of Labor and Employment, the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) and the IATF shall apply.
e. Establishments – all manufacturing, retail, and service establishments authorized or allowed to operate shall remain open, provided that certain measures are required to be observed within their premises. Establishments catering to many customers should provide a sheltered waiting area. The application of social distancing rules also applies. Such establishments are also encouraged to create a system to streamline transactions, e.g., appointment system, contactless/cashless payment, and may deny entry or report to the authorities any person who violates these persons not following social distancing and minimum health standards.

--- [Page 5] ---
Page 5 of 7
Ord. No. 0420-20

f. Travel - with respect to travel restrictions to and from the City, all authorized workers, whether employed or self-employed, under the Community Quarantine will be allowed to travel. For this purpose, proof of employment and/or business must be presented at border checkpoint.

g. Delivery of foods, medicines, and other essentials - the delivery of foods, medicines, and other essentials shall be unhampered, subject to applicable quarantine measures and curfew protocols.

h. Mass Transportation - the operation of mass public transportation and public utility vehicles in the City shall be subject to the applicable operating capacity and protocol as provided by law. The placement of fixed plastic barriers between passengers shall be mandatory in all vehicles used for public transportation. These barriers should be installed in a manner that will effect minimum inconvenience to passengers, and should be placed in front of, alongside, or behind the vehicle moves. Full disinfection of such vehicles, especially those areas accessible by passengers, should be done at least twice a day.

i. Private Transportation - Social distancing, wearing of face masks and minimum health protocols shall be observed in all private vehicles at all times, even if operated with only a driver and without passengers.

j. Motorcycles - motorcycle riders shall be required to wear full-face helmets at all times when riding a motorcycle. Subject to the requirements and specifications of the IATF in case of motorcycles with a back-rider, a fixed barrier should be placed between the driver and passenger.

SECTION 6. DESIGNATION OF FLOOR OR PAVEMENT MARKINGS - All business establishments, markets, pharmacies, banks remittance centers, medical and quarantine facilities, public and private offices and other institutions located in the City that are authorized to operate under any form of Community Quarantine (CQ) shall designate floor or pavement markings within their premises of at least one meter (six feet) distance from one person to another to maintain the required social or physical distancing.

SECTION 7. PENALTY - Any establishment or juridical entity found in violation of any of the social distancing measures under this Ordinance shall be penalized in this manner:

1st offense - administrative fine of Five Thousand Pesos (Php 5,000.00)

2nd offense - administrative fine of Five Thousand Pesos (Php 5,000.00) and one month suspension of business permit;

3rd offense - administrative fine of Five Thousand Pesos (Php 5,000.00) and three (3) month suspension of business permit;

4th offense - administrative fine of Five Thousand Pesos (Php 5,000.00) and six months suspension of business permit;

--- [Page 6] ---
Page 6 of 7
Ord. No. 0420-20

5th offense - administrative fine of Five Thousand Pesos (Php 5,000.00) and one year suspension of business permit.

If committed by an establishment or juridical entity, the owner, president, general manager or officer-in-charge of such establishment shall be held liable.

If the offender is a public officer or employee, an administrative case may also be filed against him/her pursuant to the Local Government Code 1991 or the Civil Service Laws, rules and regulations, as the case may be.

In case of natural persons found in violation of Section 3 and Section 5 of this Ordinance, a penalty of community service shall be imposed.

All fines collected will be divided in this manner: 60% to barangay making the citation, and 40% to the City Government.

SECTION 8. ORDINANCE VIOLATION RECEIPT/CITATION TICKET - An Ordinance Violation Receipt/ Citation Ticket, otherwise known as Citation Ticket, shall be issued to violators of this Ordinance. The citation ticket shall state the name and address of the violator, the specific violation committed, and the provisions of the succeeding section, "No Contest Provision." If the violation concerns a business establishment or a juridical entity, its owner, president, general manager, or officer-in-charge thereof shall be cited in the ticket.

SECTION 9. NO CONTEST PROVISION - Any person cited for violation of this Ordinance who does not contest the same and is willing to pay voluntarily within five (5) days the fine imposed or to voluntarily render community service under this Ordinance prior to the filing of a complaint before the Office of the City Prosecutor shall be allowed to do so, and shall pay the corresponding administrative fine as cited in Section 7 at the Office of the City Treasurer. Awaiting of the No Contest Provision shall exempt a person from criminal liability under this Ordinance.

The City Legal Office and the City Treasurer's Office shall provide for the procedure for the availing of the "No Contest Provision" and establish a case inventory and recording system of all violators of this Ordinance.

SECTION 10. INFORMATION DISSEMINATION - Proper information dissemination of this Ordinance, social distancing measures and minimum health protocols shall be performed in all establishments, offices, vehicles and other areas frequented by people.

SECTION 11. IMPLEMENTING OFFICES - The members of the Davao City Police Office, Task Force Davao, Davao City Public Safety and Security Command Center, Davao City Transport and Traffic Management Office, City Health Office, Barangay and SK Officials including Members of Tanod, Barangay Health Emergency Response Teams, and other City Officials to be determined by the City Mayor.

SECTION 12. SEPARABILITY CLAUSE - If, for any reason, any section or provision of this Ordinance is declared unconstitutional or invalid by a competent court, the remaining sections or provisions not affected thereby shall continue to be in full force and effect.

--- [Page 7] ---
Page 7 of 7
Ord. No. 0420-20
SECTION 13. REPEALING CLAUSE: All ordinances, resolutions, rules or regulations which are inconsistent with or contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.
SECTION 14. EFFECTIVITY: This Ordinance shall take effect fifteen (15) days after publication, and shall remain in full force and effect until the declaration of the existence of a Public Health Emergency of International Concern is retracted by the World Health Organization, or when the State of Public Health Emergency due to COVID-19 in the country is lifted.
ENACTED, on the 24th day of November 2020, by an unanimous vote of all the Members of the Sangguniang Panlungsod, there being a quorum.
CERTIFIED CORRECT:
CHARITTO N. SANTOS
Secretary to the Sangguniang Panlungsod (City Government Department Head II)
ATTESTED:
EDGAR P. IBUYAN JR.
President Pro-Tempore
Temporary Presiding Officer
cns/kjtq
APPROVED:
2020
LAPSED
OBTAINED APPROVED AFTER THE LAPSE OF 15 DAYS PER SEC. 54 (A), R.A. 7160
SARA Z. BUTERTE
City Mayor
ATTESTED:
ATTY. ZULEIKA T. LOPEZ
City Administrator
AN ORDINANCE MANDATING THE STRICT IMPLEMENTATION OF SOCIAL OR PHYSICAL DISTANCING OF PERSONS AND OTHER RELEVANT MEASURES TO CURB THE SPREAD OF COVID - 19 DISEASE IN THE CITY OF DAVAO, PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION THEREOF AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES
