=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 000172-09 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
15th City Council
4th Regular Session
Series of 2009

Republica ng Pilipinas
SANGUNIANG PANLUNGOSOD
Lungsod ng Dabaw

PRESENT:
Vice Mayor Sara Z. Duterte
Councilor Nhlo G. Abellera
Councilor Victorio S. Advancula Sr.
Councilor Wilberto E. Al-ag
Councilor Dante L. Apostol Jr.
Councilor Leonardo R. Avila III
Councilor Conrado B. Balagutan
Councilor Samuel B. Bangoy
Councilor Karlo S. Bello
Councilor Louis John J. Bonguyan
Councilor Plar C. Braga
Councilor Arnoldo Ricardo B. Cabing
Councilor Daniel B. Bayanghurang
Councilor Faust Z. Duterte
Councilor Edgar R. Ibuayan
Councilor Peter T. Lavina
Councilor Diosdado Angelo A. Malupis Sr.
Councilor Resteasy F. Manalban
Councilor Tomas M. Montemayor IV
Councilor Bonifacio L. Mulhat
Councilor Myrna G. L'Dalobo-Ortiz
Councilor Susan Isabel C. Reta
Councilor Halla Y. Sudagar
Councilor Angela A. Librado. Trinidad
Councilor Jose Louis P. Villafuerte
Councilor Rachid P. Zoobrado

ABSENT:
Councilor Ma. Belen S. Acosta
On Vacation Leave

ORDINANCE NO. 0172-09
Series of 2009

AN ORDINANCE ESTABLISHING A
HEARING SCREENING PROGRAM FOR
ALL INFANTS IN DAVAO CITY

Be it ordained by the Sangguniang Panlungsod of Davao City in
session assembled that:

SECTION 1. TITLE: This Ordinance shall be known as "THE
HEARING SCREENING PROGRAM OF DAVAO CITY";

--- [Page 2] ---
Page 2 of 6
Ord. No. 0172-09

SECTION 2. DECLARATION OF POLICY. The Amended Children Welfare Code of Davao City declares that the rights of children for their survival, protection, participation and development must be given high priority. The City of Davao respects the role of the family in providing for their children and supports the efforts of parents, other child care and development workers, Non-Government Organizations (NGOs) and communities to nurture and care for their children from infancy including the earliest stages of childhood to adolescence.

SECTION 3. OBJECTIVES. To establish and integrate a sustainable infant hearing screening program within the public health system which is designed to identify hearing loss in infants shortly after birth. It has been recommended that hearing loss be identified when a child is between six (6) months of age. This recommendation is based on studies that have shown that children identified with hearing loss prior to six (6) months of age have better chance of developing skills equivalent to their peers by the time they enter kindergarten. Children not identified until later may ultimately suffer from irreversible and permanent damage due to their loss. In order to identify this group of hearing impaired infants not identified with current testing protocols, it is now recommended that all infants have a hearing test prior to discharge from the hospital. The goal of this program is to identify all hearing impaired infants at an early age, thereby increasing these children's chance at becoming healthy and more;

SECTION 4. DEFINITION OF TERMS. For purposes of this Ordinance, the following terms are defined as follows:

4.a. Audiologist: is a health care professional who is trained and who is specializing in identifying, diagnosing and monitoring disorders of the auditory and vestibular portions of the ear including the rehabilitation of individuals with hearing loss and related disorders;

4.b. Barangay Health Worker (BHW)/Barangay Nutrition Scholar (BNS): an indigenous member of the community that acts as link of the city health system in the community;

4.c. Detection Machine: a machine and/or device to be used for identifying disorders of the auditory portion of the ear;

4.d. Hearing: the subjective human response to sound, the faculty or sense by which sound is perceived;

4.e. Hearing defects/impairments/loss: a full or partial decrease in the ability to detect or understand sound;

--- [Page 3] ---
Page 3 of 6
Ord. No. 0172-09

4.f. Hearing screening: a diagnostic or medical examination conducted by any competent physician/audiologist or a specially trained personnel from the City Health Workers, Barangay Health Workers (BHWs), and Barangay Nutrition Scholars (ENS) for early detection of hearing defects.

4.g. Learning Disability: refers to a group of disorders that affect a broad range of academic and functional skills including the ability to speak, listen, read, write, spell, reason, and organize information.

4.h. Infant: refers to any child aged 0-3 months old.

SECTION 5. SCOPE AND APPLICABILITY: The provisions of this Ordinance shall be applicable within the entire jurisdiction of Davao City and the program shall cover all infants in Davao City.

SECTION 6. HEARING SCREENING REGULATIONS: The following shall govern the hearing screening program:

6.a. The City Health Office shall integrate the hearing screening program in the barangay health centers, provide facilities, acquire detection machines and employ qualified audiologists necessary for the proper implementation of the program. All infants referred to it for hearing screening shall be covered under the program and all infants shall be screened free of charge.

6.b. The attending physician or health practitioner shall orient the parent or parents of the infant on the mandatory orientation of the benefits of hearing screening. In case the public hospital has an existing hearing screening program, the infant shall be screened subject to the consent of the parent or parents concerned and the payment of appropriate fees. In case the parent/s cannot afford the fees, the attending physician or health practitioner shall issue a referral to the City Health Office bearing the signature of the parent/s as well. The certification of the hearing screening had been conducted on the infant shall be issued by the audiologist or any authorized medical attendant.

--- [Page 4] ---
Page 4 of 6
Ord No. 0172-09
6.c. In case of deliveries in the homes and in the lying-in and maternity clinics, the medical attendant or midwife shall give the mandatory orientation on the benefits of the hearing screening on infants to the parent or parents. The medical attendant or midwife shall thereafter issue a referral for the infant's hearing screening at the City Health Office and/or any private or public hospital where there is an existing hearing screening program. The City Health Office shall issue the mandatory orientation has been given and/or that a referral to the City Health Office or private or public hospital has been made shall be issued by the attending physician bearing the signature of the parent or parents as well.
6.d. The City Health Office shall ensure that midwives, traditional birth attendants, Barangay Health Workers (BHWs), Barangay Nutrition Scholars (BNSs), and volunteers are informed of the existence of the hearing screening program. The City Health Office shall require said midwives, traditional birth attendants, Barangay Health Workers (BHW), Barangay Nutrition Scholars (BNS) and volunteers, to conduct information dissemination campaign on the hearing screening program in all barangays;
6.e. The Barangay Council/for the Protection of Children (BCPC) shall monitor all infants to undergo the hearing screening program in their respective barangays;
6.f. The City Health Office shall undertake skills training programs for hearing screening for all its audiologists, volunteers and community-based health practitioners;
SECTION 7. ISSUANCE OF HEARING SCREENING CERTIFICATE: The audiologists of any well-trained health care personnel in the private and public hospitals and the City Health Office personnel who have conducted the hearing screening tests shall issue the requisite certification to indicate that the infant has fully undergone the hearing screening and indicate therein the result of the test;
SECTION 8. PROHIBITED ACTS: The following acts shall be prohibited:
8.a. Failure of the attending physician to conduct the mandatory orientation on the parent or parents of an infant on the benefits of hearing screening as well as the failure to issue a certification to that effect bearing the signature of the parent/s before the discharge of the newborn from any private or public hospital,

--- [Page 5] ---
Page 5 of 6
Ord No. 0172-09

8.b. Failure of the attending physician to refer an infant for hearing screening under the program of the private or public hospital of the City Health Office as the case maybe, as well as the failure to issue a certification to that effect bearing the signature of the parent or parents before the discharge of the infant from any private or public hospital;

8.c. In cases of deliveries in the homes and in the lying-in and maternity clinics, the failure of the medical attendant or midwife to conduct the mandatory orientation on the parent or parents of an infant on the benefits of hearing screening as well as the failure to issue a certification to that effect bearing the signature of the parent or parents;

8.d. In case of deliveries in the homes and in lying-in and maternity clinics, the failure of the medical attendant or midwife to refer an infant for hearing screening under the program of the private or public hospital or to the City Health Office, as the case maybe, as well as the failure to issue a certification to that effect bearing the signature of the parent or parents;

8.e. Failure of an audiologist or any well-trained personnel to conduct hearing screening on the newborn despite appropriate referral including the failure to issue a certification to that effect with results properly indicated;

8.f. Failure and/or refusal of midwives, traditional birth attendants, Barangay Health Workers (BHWs), Barangay Juridical Scholars (BJS) and volunteers to conduct information dissemination campaign on the hearing screening program in all barangays as required by the City Health Office;

SECTION 9. FUNDING: The City Government of Davao shall appropriate funds from its Annual Development Fund (ADF) specifically for the purchase of detection machines as well as the engagement of audiologist for the three [3] legislative districts and for the implementation of the hearing screening program under the auspices of the City Health Office;

SECTION 10. SEPARABILITY CLAUSE: If any provision of this Ordinance is declared void and unconstitutional, the other provisions not affected shall remain in full force and effect;

SECTION 11. REPEALING CLAUSE: Any ordinance, local issuances or orders inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance is hereby repealed and modified accordingly;

--- [Page 6] ---
Page 6 of 6
Ord No. 0172-09

SECTION 12. EFFECTIVITY. This Ordinance shall take effect fifteen (15) days after the purchase of the detection machines for the three legislative districts;

ENACTED, January 27, 2009, by a majority vote of all the Members of the Sangguniang Panlungsod.

(Note: Councilors Dante I. Apostol Sr. and Conrad C. Baluran were out when this ordinance was approved.)

CERTIFIED CORRECT:

ZULEIKA T. LOPEZ Secretary to the Sangguniang Panlungsod (City Government Department Head II)

ATTESTED:

SARA Z. DUTERTE Vice Mayor Presiding Officer

MAR 1 1 2009

APPROVED:

RODRIGO R. DUTERTE City Mayor

ATTESTED

WENDEL F. AVIRAQO City Administrator
