=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 0361-20 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
Republic of the Philippines
CITY OF DAVAO
Office of the Sangguniang Panlungsod

19th City Council
35th Regular Session
Series of 2020

PRESENT:
Councilor Edgar P. Ibyuan Jr.
Vice Mayor Sebastian Z. Duterte
Councilor Ralph O. Abella
Councilor Nilo D. Abellera
Councilor Maria Belen S. Acosta
Councilor Bai Hundra Cassandra Dominique N. Advincula
Councilor Wilberto O. Al-ag
Councilor Jose A. Ayala Sr.
Councilor Corrado C. Baluran
Councilor Jessica M. Bonguyan
Councilor Louie John J. Bonguyan
Councilor Pillar C. Braga
Councilor Augusto Javier G. Campos III
Councilor Danilo C. Dayanghiring
Councilor Jose R. Dayan
Councilor Edgar R. Ibyuan Sr.
Councilor Richlyn N. Justol-Baguilod
Councilor Pamela A. Librado-Morata
Councilor Jaffar U. Marohomsalic
Councilor Bonifacio E. Militar
Councilor Antonio Ortega Jr.
Councilor Antoinette G. Principe-Castrodes
Councilor J. Melchor B. Quitaan Jr.
Councilor Alberto T. Ungab
Councilor Mary Joseelle D. Villafuente
Councilor Jesus Joseph P. Zozobraado III

ABSENT:
Councilor Diosdado Angelo Junior R. Mahipus

ORDINANCE NO. 0361-20
Series of 2020

AN ORDINANCE STRENGTHENING THE MANDATORY INFANTS AND CHILDREN HEALTH IMMUNIZATION ACT OF 2011 (REPUBLIC ACT NO. 10152), THROUGH THE USE OF THE EARLY CHILDHOOD CARE AND DEVELOPMENT (ECCD) CARD

--- [Page 2] ---
Page 2 of 7
Ord. No. 0361-20

Be it ordained by the Honorable Sangguniang Panlungsod of Davao City, in session assembled, that:

SECTION 1. TITLE: This Ordinance shall be known as the "COMPREHENSIVE IMMUNIZATION FOR ALL INFANTS AND CHILDREN ORDINANCE OF DAVAO CITY".

SECTION 2. DECLARATION OF POLICY - It is hereby declared to be the policy of the State to take a proactive role in the preventive health care of infants and children. Towards this end, the State shall adopt a comprehensive, mandatory and sustainable immunization program for vaccine-preventable diseases for all infants and children.

In response to this policy as articulated in Republic Act No. 10152, also known as the "Mandatory Infants and Children Health Immunization Act of 2011", the City of Davao will endeavor to make immunization coverage more comprehensive in order to curb the proliferation of vaccine-preventable diseases. With the strengthening of the promotion and implementation of Republic Act No. 10152 in the city, the possibility of future outbreaks of vaccine-preventable diseases will be reduced, and the general health and welfare of its people will similarly be preserved.

SECTION 3. DEFINITION OF TERMS - The terms used in this Ordinance are herein defined as follows:

a) Adverse Effects Following Immunization (AEF) - any untoward medical occurrence which follows immunization and which does not necessarily have a causal relationship with the usage of the vaccine. The adverse event may be unfavorable or unintended sign, abnormal laboratory finding, symptom or disease;

b) Urgent circumstances - situations that demand unusual or immediate action which necessitate the bypassing of usual procedures. The circumstances are such that it would cause a reasonable person or authority to believe that prompt action is necessary to prevent harm to the general public. One example would be a public health emergency which demands urgent and immediate action;

c) Immunization - the process whereby a person is made immune or resistant to an infectious disease, for purposes of this Ordinance, shall be through the administration of a vaccine;

d) Outbreak - the occurrence of disease cases in excess of normal expectancy. The number of cases vary according to the disease causing agent, and the size and type of previous and existing exposure to the agent. Disease outbreaks are usually caused by an infection, transmitted through person-to-person contact, animal-to-person contact, or from the environment or other media. Outbreaks may also occur following exposure to chemicals or to radioactive materials;

e) Vaccine-preventable disease - an infectious disease for which an effective preventive vaccine exists. If a person acquires a vaccine-preventable disease and dies from it, the death is considered a vaccine-preventable death;

f) Vaccines - biological preparations which stimulate the body's own immune system to protect the person against subsequent infection or disease. Vaccines as defined in this Ordinance shall be limited to the list enumerated in Republic Act No. 10152;

--- [Page 3] ---
Page 3 of 7
Ord. No. 0361-20
SECTION 4. SCOPE AND COVERAGE - This Ordinance applies to all infants and children of Davao City, and their respective parents and legal guardians. Children of non-residents and aliens may also be subject to coverage as deemed proper by the City Health Office or relevant government instrumentalities.
The mandatory basic immunization provided for under this Ordinance will be administered to infants and children, and shall cover the following vaccine-preventable diseases, thereafter collectively defined as the "Mandatory Basic Immunization Schedule":
a. BCG - Tuberculosis;
b. DPT - Hep B-HIB - Diphtheria, Pertussis and Tetanus, Hepatitis B, Pneumonia, Meningitis;
c. OPV-IPV - Poliomyelitis;
d. MMR - Measles, Mumps and Rubella;
e. Hepatitis B - Hepatitis B;
f. PCV - Pneumonia, Meningitis;
g. Such other types as may be determined by the Secretary of Health or by directive from proper authorities, especially during exigent circumstances.
The above schedule may be applied as appropriate to children up to five (5) years old, regardless of economic, educational, and immunization status, in the event that they are found to have lacked the mandatory basic vaccines as required by law. Vaccines given under this Ordinance shall be free of charge at any government health center, government hospital or at any such place where an immunization campaign is performed in compliance heretofore.
The aforementioned coverage, however, shall further allow for circumstances which require the inclusion of children above five (5) years old, and to include booster shots and other vaccine types.
The Hepatitis-B vaccine shall be administered by any duly-licensed physician, nurse or midwife to all infants born in hospitals, health infirmaries, health centers or lying-in centers with obstetrical and pediatric services, whether public or private, within twenty-four (24) hours after birth: Provided, however, that in cases of infants born in places other than the above, any duly licensed physician, nurse or midwife who delivers, or assists in the delivery of the newborn shall be responsible for administering the vaccine to the latter: Provided, further, that for deliveries assisted by persons other than the health physician, the nurse or midwife shall administer the vaccine within two (2) days to a facilities capable facility so as to be immunized against Hepatitis-B within twenty-four (24) hours after birth but not later than seven (7) days: Provided, finally, that subsequent doses of Hepatitis-B vaccination shall be completed according to the recommended schedule of Hepatitis-B immunization, as may be provided by the Implementing Rules and Regulations (IRR) to be issued by the Department of Health (DOH).
SECTION 5. IMPLEMENTATION - The City Health Office (CHO) shall be the lead agency in the implementation of mandatory immunization, and shall promulgate the rules, regulations, and policies to effect its goals and objectives of Republic Act No. 10152. It shall also work closely with the Philippine Pediatric Society, Inc., and its Davao Southern Mindanao Chapter, the Philippine Foundation for Vaccination, and the Pediatric Infectious Disease Society of the Philippines.

--- [Page 4] ---
Page 4 of 7
Ord. No. 0361-20

Every child thus vaccinated will be given an Early Childhood Care and Development (ECCD) Card, hereinafter referred to as the "Immunization Card" by the health care facility, whether public or private. In the interest of commonality, the City Health Office shall also distribute copies of ECCD Cards to private physicians and health practitioners which may be utilized in place of the various immunization cards used in the private sector.

The immunization card should be filled up with the pertinent information regarding the child's identity and the vaccines he/she has received. All subsequent immunizations must be recorded in the card. Immunization information therein may be used for other related purposes required by law, such as, but not limited to, compliance to health conditionalties for beneficiaries of the Pampawid Familying Pilipino Program (4P's) and others.

Any such entry in the immunization cards and accompanying records shall only be made by authorized persons, such as duly authorized and/or accredited barangay health workers, health and medical personnel and medical professionals practicing both in the public and private health care institutions.

A portion of the ECCD card or immunization card shall be reserved for the provision of an express waiver exemption.

The immunization card should be treated with care and importance, and with strict confidentiality. Any unauthorized tampering thereof may be a ground for disqualification of any applicable benefits related thereto, as well as the possibility of further liability provided for in analogous and pertinent laws and statutes. In case of loss, the card will be replaced after submission of a notarized affidavit of loss.

Every barangay is also required to make a faithful record of every child and the latter's corresponding immunization compliance. A copy of the said record shall be forwarded to the CHO every quarter of the year for proper record-keeping.

SECTION 6. SUBMISSION OF IMMUNIZATION CARD AS A REQUIREMENT FOR SCHOOL ENROLLMENT - The mandatory basic immunization schedule based on the schedule provided for in Republic Act 10152 may be incorporated in the enrollment procedure in all public and private day care centers, preschool learning centers, kindergarten schools, madrassahs and tribal schools. As such, the immunization card may be presented to the school when required as part of the enrollment procedure. Information contained in the immunization card will be used by the school's student school health record. This record will be used by CHO to identify and keep a faithful database of children who are fully immunized and those who lack vaccines.

Failure to submit the immunization card, or to comply with the basic immunization schedule, will not bar any student from enrollment.

SECTION 7. EXEMPTIONS - Exempt from the coverage of this Ordinance are:

a. Those who are declared by appropriate medical professionals to have any allergies or found to exhibit adverse reactions to vaccine;

b. Those with prevailing medical conditions and were advised to refrain from vaccination;

c. Those persons covered by contraindication clauses made by the manufacturers and suppliers of the respective vaccines;

--- [Page 5] ---
Page 5 of 7

Ord. No. 0361-20

d. Those who object based on religious and cultural grounds;
e. All those who are exempted as provided by other laws or statutes; and
f. Those who object based on philosophical backgrounds and those who choose not to be immunized;

Such facts should be disclosed by the party claiming exemption.

SECTION 8. EDUCATION AND INFORMATION CAMPAIGN - This Ordinance shall call for a simultaneous education and information campaign. All health care practitioners (whether in the public or private sector) or health care workers who are administering prenatal care shall educate all pregnant mothers on the importance of giving their infants the basic immunization services as well as any possible effects of immunization.

Barangay health centers are also required to have Information and Education Materials placed in strategic locations for easy appreciation of the benefits of mandatory immunization. Barangay officials are also obligated to integrate this information campaign in their daily activities. For the purpose of this Ordinance, barangay officials are likewise encouraged to include the importance of basic immunization, its effects, and the principles of this Ordinance in their respective education and information activities.

In the first two years of implementation of this Ordinance, a concurrent orientation for parents and guardians in all public and private day care centers, preschool learning centers, kindergarten schools, madrasas, and tribal schools in the city shall be carried out. This orientation will reinforce the national policy for mandatory immunization, and the benefits thereof. This is also a tool to obtain the express consent of mothers or those exercising parental authority to the infant or child for the latter's immunization.

SECTION 9. CONTINUING EDUCATION FOR HEALTH WORKERS - There shall be a continuing education for all public health workers involved in vaccination/immunization. Seminars, trainings, symposia and up to date information materials on vaccinology, cold chain management and safety protocols in the implementation of the immunization program shall be provided to them on a regular basis.

SECTION 10. OBLIGATION TO INFORM - Any public or private physician, nurse, midwife, nursing aide or skilled birth attendant who delivers or assists in the delivery of a newborn shall, prior to delivery, inform parents or the legal guardian of the newborn of the availability, nature and benefits of immunization against vaccine-preventable diseases at birth, as well as the requirement of mandatory immunization.

SECTION 11. CREATION OF A LOCAL ADVERSE EFFECTS FOLLOWING IMMUNIZATION (AEFI) COMMITTEE - A local AEFI Committee shall be created, whose role is to respond to any adverse events following immunization through reporting, monitoring, surveillance, cross-agency collaboration, and other coordinated modes. The AEFI shall be composed of the following:

• City Mayor - Head
• City Health Officer - Assistant Head
• Department of Health Representative - Member
• Philippine Society of the Philippines Davao Southern Mindanao Chapter representative - Member
• Philippine Society of Asthma, Allergy and Immunology, Inc. Davao representative - Member

--- [Page 6] ---
Page 6 of 7
Ord. No. 0361-20

Pediatric Infectious Disease Society of the Philippines Davao representative - Member
Infection control head/nurse - Member
Chairperson of the Committee on Health of the Sangguniang Panlungsod - Member

SECTION 12. APPROPRIATIONS - The Local Government of Davao City shall allocate funds for the implementation of the various undertakings relative to this Ordinance.

SECTION 13. NON-COMPLIANCE - Parents and legal guardians of infants and children who do not comply with the mandatory immunization schedule shall not be penalized. In addition, no child shall be barred from enrollment in any school, nor be subjected to prejudice in any proceeding by mere non-compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance.

SECTION 14. DUE DILIGENCE - The Immunization Card, as government issue, shall be in the nature of a public document. Due care and diligence are required of those who are issued the same. The City Health Office and barangays are also required to exercise due diligence in the keeping of immunization records. Furthermore, these records are to be confidential, in compliance with the Data Privacy Act.

SECTION 15. SEPARABILITY CLAUSE - If, for any reason, any section or provision of this Ordinance shall be declared unconstitutional or invalid, other sections or provisions hereof not affected by such declaration shall continue to be in full force and effect.

SECTION 16. REPEALING CLAUSE - All Ordinances, Resolutions, Executive Orders, Memoranda and Administrative Regulations or parts thereof in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.

SECTION 17. EFFECTIVITY - This Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon approval.

ENACTED, on the 6th day of October 2020, by an unanimous vote of all the Members of the Sangguniang Panlungsod (City Government Department Head).

CERTIFIED CORRECT:

CHIRITU N. SANTOS
Secretary to the Sangguniang Panlungsod
(City Government Department Head)

ATTESTED:
EDGAR P. IBUYAN JR.
President Pro Tempore
Temporary Presiding Officer
cns/kjtq

--- [Page 7] ---
Page 7 of 7
Ord. No. 0361-20
APPROVED: DEC 07 2020
SARA Z. DUTERTE
City Mayor
ATTESTED:
ATTY. ZULEIKA T. LOPEZ
City Administrator
An Ordinance strengthening the Mandatory Infants and Children Health Immunization Act of 2011
(Republic Act No. 10152), through the use of the Early Childhood Care and Development (ECCD) Card
