=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 0393-20 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
Republic of the Philippines
CITY OF DAVAO
Office of the Sangguniang Panlungsod

19th City Council
38th Regular Session
Series of 2020

PRESENT:

Councilor
Alberto T. Ungab
- Temporary Presiding Officer
Councilor
Ralph O. Abella
Councilor
Nilo D. Abellera
Councilor
María Belen S. Acosta
Councilor
Bai Hundra Cassandra Dominique N. Advincula
Councilor
Wilberto E. Al-ag
Councilor
Dante L. Apostol Sr.
Councilor
Conrad Baluran
Councilor
Dionisio M. Bonguyan
Councilor
Pilar C. Braga
Councilor
Augusto Javier G. Campos III
Councilor
Danilo C. Dayanghirang
Councilor
Jonard C. Dayap
Councilor
Edgar P. Ibuyan Jr.
Councilor
Edgar P. Ibuyan Sr.
Councilor
Dionisyn N. Jumaraguilod
Councilor
Pantaleon Abrado-Morata
Councilor
Diosdado Angelo Junior R. Mahipus
Councilor
Myrna G. L'Dalado-Ortiz
Councilor
Antoinette G. Principe-Castrodes
Councilor
J. Melchor B. Quitain Jr.
Councilor
Mary Joselle D. Villafuerte
Councilor
Jesus Joseph P. Zozobraado III

ABSENT:

Vice Mayor
Sebastian Z. Duterte
- On Official Business
Councilor
Louie John J. Bonguyan
- On Domestic Emergency Leave
Councilor
Jaffar U. Marohomaliscal
Councilor
Bonifacio E. Militar

ORDINANCE NO. 0393-20
Series of 2020

AN ORDINANCE PROMOTING ORGAN DONATION IN DAVAO CITY AND
INSTITUTING MECHANISMS AS WELL AS APPROPRIATING FUNDS FOR
THE PURPOSE

--- [Page 2] ---
Page 2 of 5
Ord. No. 0393-20

Be it ordained by the Honorable Sangguniang Panlungsod of Davao City, in session assembled, that:

SECTION 1. TITLE: This Ordinance shall be known as the "ORGAN DONATION ORDINANCE OF DAVAO CITY".

SECTION 2. DECLARATION OF POLICY - Republic Act No. 7170, otherwise known as "An Act Authorizing the Legacy or Donation of All or Part of a Human Body after Death for Specified Purposes" also known as the "Organ Donation Act of 1991" as amended by Republic Act No. 7885, to include organ and tissue donations from donors who have been declared brain dead were used as basis of this Ordinance.

SECTION 3. PRINCIPLES
1. That organ donation is legal based on Republic Act No. 7170;
2. Organ Donation is the process of surgically or surgically removing an organ or tissue from one person (the deceased donor) and placing into another person (the living recipient);
3. End-Stage Organ failure can strike anyone of us;
4. Organ donation saves lives;
5. No donor... no transplant;
6. A person who is declared to be brain dead is legally dead and is an eligible Donor;
7. A benevolent society is a caring society who takes care of its sick people or citizens.

SECTION 4. PURPOSE - The purpose of this Ordinance is to institute mechanisms to effectively promote deceased Organ Donation in the City of Davao and to appropriate funds for the purpose. Specifically, the Ordinance aims to:
4.1 Inform and enlighten the general public about the government's program on human organ donation;
4.2 To improve the culture of organ donation by correcting the myths and cultural beliefs regarding deceased organ donation and to emphasize in this campaign that a deceased person can help others who may need an organ transplant in order to live and extend life;
4.3 To create the Davao City Organ Donation Task Force to implement this Ordinance.

SECTION 5. DEFINITION OF TERMS
5.1 Death - the irreversible cessation of circulatory and respiratory functions or the irreversible cessation of all functions of the entire brain, including the brain stem. A person shall be medically and legally dead if either:
1) In the opinion of the attending physician, based on the acceptable standards of medical practice, there is an absence of natural respiratory and cardiac functions and attempts at resuscitation would not be successful in restoring those functions. In this case, death shall be deemed to have occurred at the time these functions ceased; or

--- [Page 3] ---
Page 3 of 5
Ord. No. 0393-20
2) In the opinion of the consulting physician, concurred in by the attending physician, that on the basis of acceptable standards of medical practice, there is an irreversible cessation of all brain functions; and considering the absence of such functions, further attempts at resuscitation or continued supportive maintenance would not be successful in restoring such natural functions. In this case, death shall be deemed to have occurred at the time when these conditions first appeared.
The death of the person shall be determined in accordance with the acceptable standards of medical practice and shall be diagnosed separately by the attending physician and another consulting physician, both of whom must be appropriately qualified and suitably experienced in the care of such patients. The death shall be recorded in the patient's medical record.
5.2 Decedent - a deceased individual, and includes a still-born infant or fetus;
5.3 Donor - an individual authorized under this Ordinance to donate all or part of the body of a decedent;
5.4 Hospital - a hospital licensed, accredited or approved under the law, and includes a hospital operated by the Government.
5.5 Part - includes transplantable organs, tissues, eyes, bones, arteries, blood, other fluids and other portions of the human body.
5.6 Person - an individual, corporation, estate, trust, partnership, association, the Government or any of its subdivisions, agencies or instrumentalities, including government-owned or controlled corporations; or any other legal entity.
5.7 Physician or Surgeon - a physician or surgeon licensed or authorized to practice medicine under the laws of the Republic of the Philippines.
5.8 Testator - an individual who makes a legacy of all or part of his/her body;
5.9 Transplant - the process of surgically removing an organ from one person (organ donor) and placing it into another person (organ recipient);
5.10 Transplant Coordinator - is a healthcare professional - doctor, nurse, or allied health science graduate who coordinates activities related to organ donation and transplantation.
SECTION 6. PROMOTION OF ORGAN DONATION - Shall include among others the following information based on Republic Act No. 7170:
6.1 Person who may execute a donation;
6.2 Person who may become a legatee or donee;
6.3 Duty of Hospitals;
6.4 Manners of executing a legacy;

--- [Page 4] ---
Page 4 of 5
Ord. No. 0393-20

6.5 Manners of executing the donations;
6.6 Delivery of document of legacy or donation;
6.7 Revocation of legacy or donation;
6.8 Rights and duties after death;
6.9 International sharing of human organs or tissues; and
6.10 Other information that will be helpful for this purpose.

SECTION 7. CREATION OF THE DAVAO CITY ORGAN DONATION COUNCIL (DCODC) - Through an executive order of the City Mayor, the Davao City Organ Donation Council (DCODC) shall be created to serve as the policy-making Body for the purpose of this Ordinance.

The DCODC shall be composed of the following:

City Mayor - Chairperson
City Health Officer - Vice-Chairperson

Members:
1. Chairperson of the SP Committee on Health
2. Chairperson of the SP Committee on Education, Science and Technology, Arts and Culture
3. City Legal Officer
4. Central 911
5. Department of Health, RXI - Director or authorized representative
6. Southern Philippines Medical Center - Chief or authorized representative.

SECTION 8. FUNCTIONS OF THE DAVAO CITY ORGAN DONATION COUNCIL
1. The Council shall ensure the widespread dissemination and campaign for organ donation;
2. The Council shall create a Task Force to monitor and extend guidance to families of potential organ donors;
3. The Council shall create a unit in the City Health Office to serve as the Task Force to be the implementing arm of this Ordinance and that a Davao City Transplant Coordinator be designated, a trained health professional to act as liaison officer between the City and the donor, Hospital and transplant team;
4. That the Council shall make sure that all legal and medical procedures in organ donation are followed in coordination with the Department of Health - Regional Office XI, the Southern Philippines Medical Center (SPMC) Human Advocates and Retrieval Efforts (SHARE) and the SPMC Organ Procurement Organization (OPO);
5. The Council shall determine the budget necessary for the effective implementation of this Ordinance;

--- [Page 5] ---
Page 5 of 5
Ord. No. 0393-20
6. The Council shall establish an online Data Base Donor Registry System; and
7. The Council shall do other functions whenever necessary for the effective implementation of this Ordinance.
SECTION 9. REPEALING CLAUSE - All other laws, decrees, order issuances, rules and regulations which are inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed, amended or modified accordingly.
SECTION 10. SEPARABILITY CLAUSE - If, for any reason, any provision of this Ordinance, or any part thereof, is declared invalid or unconstitutional, all other sections or provisions not affected thereby shall remain in full force and effect.
SECTION 12. EFFECTIVITY - This Ordinance shall take effect fifteen (15) days after publication.
ENACTED, on the 29th day of October 2020, by a unanimous vote of all the Members of the Sanggunian, there being a quorum.
CERTIFIED CORRECT:
CHARITO N. SANTOS
Secretary to the Sangguniang Panlungsod
(City Government Department Head)
ATTESTED:
ALBERTO T. LUNGAB
Acting Vice Mayor
Temporary Presiding Officer
cns/kjtq
APPROVED: DEC 2 3 2020
SARA Z. DUTERTE
City Mayor
ATTESTED:
ATTY. ZULEIKA T. JÓPEZ
City Administrator
AN ORDINANCE PROMOTING ORGAN DONATION IN DAVAO CITY AND INSTITUTING MECHANISMS AS WELL AS APPROPRIATING FUNDS FOR THE PURPOSE
