=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance no. 038-99 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
Page 1 of 5

Republika ng Pilipinas
SANGUNIYAN NG PANLUNGSOO
Lungsod ng Dabaw
Twelfth City Council
30th Regular Session
ORDINANCE NO. 038
Series of 1999

AN ORDINANCE CREATING THE CITY COOPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT OFFICE (CCDO), APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR, AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES

Re it ordained by the Sangguniang Panlungsod of Davao City in session assembled:

SECTION 1. TITLE: This Ordinance shall be known as an "Ordinance creating the City Cooperative Development Office (CCDO) appropriating funds therefor and for other purposes";

SECTION 2. DECLARATION OF POLICY: It is hereby declared a policy that the City shall ensure the viability and growth of cooperatives as instrument of social justice, equity, self-reliance, economic development and people empowerment.

Towards this end, the City shall recognize cooperatives as associations organized for the economic and social betterment of their members, operating business enterprises based on cooperative principles and founded on generally accepted cooperative principles and practices, pursuant to the mandate of Republic Act No. 7160, otherwise known as the Social Co-operatives Act, Executive Order No. 4 dated June 1, 1975, of the President of the Philippines, and Republic Act No. 6938, otherwise known as the Cooperative Code of the Philippines;

SECTION 3. CREATION OF THE CITY COOPERATIVE DEVELOPMENT OFFICE: There is hereby created a new City Cooperative Development Office (CCDO) which shall be primarily responsible for the formulation and implementation of the cooperative development programs and to carry out the provisions of this Ordinance.

SECTION 4. POWERS, FUNCTIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES: The City Cooperative Development Office (CCDO) shall be primarily responsible for the formulation and implementation of the City's cooperative development programs, and shall:

--- [Page 2] ---
Page 2 of 5

a) Formulate measures for the consideration of the Sanggunian Panlungsod, and provide technical assistance and support to the City Mayor in carrying out the functions of the City Mayor in the delivery of social services and provision of facilities through the development of cooperatives, and providing access to such services and facilities;

b) Develop plans and strategies and upon approval thereof by the mayor, implement the same particularly those which the mayor is empowered to implement and which the sanggunian is empowered to provide for under the Local Government Code;

c) Assist in the organization of cooperatives;

d) Provide technical and other forms of assistance to existing cooperatives to enhance their viability as economic enterprises and social organizations;

e) Assist cooperatives in establishing linkages with government agencies and non-government organizations involved in the promotion and integration of the concept of cooperatives in the livelihoods of the people and other community activities;

f) Be in the frontline of cooperative organizations, rehabilitation or viability-enhancement, particularly during and in the aftermath of man-made and natural calamities and disasters, to aid in their survival and, if necessary, subsequent rehabilitation;

g) Recommend to the Sanggunian and advises the Mayor on all other matters relative to cooperative development and viability-enhancement which will improve the livelihood and quality of life of the inhabitants.

h) In pursuing the above duties and responsibilities, shall:

1. Initiate and implement a program of cooperative production and development, in line with the relations and functions of the development of cooperatives, and in coordination with other established cooperatives within its area of jurisdiction.

2. Implement continuing information and education programs for the promotion and development of cooperatives, likewise, cooperation with or establish cooperatives in the area;

3. Extend technical assistance to existing cooperatives which need enhancement and rehabilitation;

--- [Page 3] ---
Page 3 of 5

4. Undertake the evaluation of any proposed cooperative's economic survey, and requirements for registration and recommend its registration or non-registration;

5. Monitors compliance of cooperatives with the rules and regulations and other issuances of Cooperative Development Authority (CDA), including those reached through its mediation, conciliation conferences and as a result of CDA's decisions.

6. Provide such information as may be required by the Cooperative Development Authority (CDA) as part of CDA's research projects.

SECTION 5. Organizational Structure and Staffing Pattern: The City Cooperative Development Office (CCDO) shall have a City Cooperative Officer, an Assistant City Cooperative Officer, four (4) Division/Divisional Assistants, namely: (1) Cooperatives Development Management Division; (2) Administrative Support Division; (3) Information, Education and Training Division, and with District Extension Service Division. The staffing pattern is shown in the Organizational Structure and the Staffing Pattern marked as Annex "A" & "B" and the Functional Chart marked as Annex "C", respectively.

SECTION 6. Functions of the Operational Components/Divisions: The City Cooperative Development Office (CCDO) shall work and operate as follows:

1. COOPERATIVES DEVELOPMENT AND MANAGEMENT DIVISION: This division is responsible for initiating and implementing programs for cooperative promotion and development; assist in developing plans and strategies relative to the integration of cooperatives principles and methods in programs and projects, recommends policies, standards and guidelines; process applications for securing grants and/or loans relative to cooperative operations.

2. ADMINISTRATIVE SUPPORT DIVISION: This division is responsible for planning and directing all administrative activities and service functions relative to personnel and records management, supply and property utilization, budget preparation, maintenance and repair. Serve as the center of communication.

--- [Page 4] ---
Page 4 of 5

3. INFORMATION, EDUCATION AND TRAINING DIVISION. This Division is responsible in the conduct of seminars and workshops; develop operating and training materials; promote cooperative promotion, organization and development; Develops and maintains management information system;

Assist the cooperatives in establishing linkages with government agencies and non-government organizations involved in the promotion and organization of the concept of cooperatives in the livelihood of the people and other community activities;

4. DISTRICT EXTENSION SERVICES. The district extension services provide technical and other forms of assistance to existing cooperatives to enhance cooperativism as an economic enterprise and social organization;

Assist in the evaluation of proposed cooperatives economic survey, and requirements for registration and or non-registration; assist in the regulatory powers of Cooperative Development Authority (CDA);

SECTION 7. TRANSFER OF COOPERATIVE FUNCTIONS, PERSONNEL AND ASSIST. The cooperative functions presently performed by the Cooperative Development Division of the City Agriculturist Office including the functions and duties shall be transferred to the Cooperative Development Office (CCDO) within thirty (30) days upon effectiveness of this Ordinance. All personnel of the Cooperative Development Division of City Agriculturist Office shall be given prior appointment to the key positions of the City Cooperative Development Office (CCDO), provided that the required qualifications are set;

SECTION 8. ACCREDITATION OF OTHER GOVERNMENT AGENCIES AND NON-GOVERNMENT ORGANIZATIONS (NGOs). Other Government Agencies and Non-Government Organizations (NGOs) which are involved in the promotions, organization, and development of cooperatives shall apply for accreditation with the Quipacayamun of the Sanggunian Pangalungna through the City Cooperative Development Office (CCDO), pursuant to Sec. 108 of R.A.7616 and Department of Interior Local Government (DLB) Memorandum Circular No. 98-116 dated June 18, 1998.

SECTION 9. STATUS OF EXISTING COOPERATIVES. All registered cooperatives in the City of Davao shall be required to submit to the City Cooperative Development Office (CCDO) a copy of the Cooperative Development Ordinance together with their By-laws and Articles of Cooperation together with a profile of their cooperatives and Annual Reports on the status of their operations and Audited Financial Statements within sixty (60) days upon effectiveness of this Ordinance and every year thereafter.

--- [Page 5] ---
Page 5 of 5

SECTION 10. BUDGETARY ADOUIGEMENTS. The Personal Service Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses, and Capital Outlay requirements of the City Cooperative Development Office (CCDO) shall be included in the Fiscal Year 1994 Annual Budget. In the subsequent years, the City Cooperative Development Office (CCDO) shall receive a regular appropriation under the local Annual Budget upon the recommendation of the City Mayor.

SECTION 11. REPEALING CLAUSE. Ordinance No. 2374, Series of 1994, otherwise known as an ordinance approving the Organizational Structure and Staffing Pattern of the City of Davao and all its offices, departments, bureaus, administrative orders, rules and regulations inconsistent herewith are hereby amended and/or modified accordingly;

SECTION 12. EFFECTIVITY. This Ordinance shall commence to take effect immediately.

ENACTED, September 7, 1999 by a majority vote of all the Members of the Sangguniang Panlungsod.

CERTIFIED CORRECT:

LOLITA J.C. GARCIA Acting Secretary Sangguniang Panlungsod

ATTESTED:

EMMANUEL D. GALICIA, Jr.
Majority Floor Leader
Acting Presiding Officer

APPROVED: 04/1 1999

BENJAMIN C. DE GUZMAN
City Mayor

ATTESTED:

ESTEFAN M. LEDERMA
City Administrator
