=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 000044-56 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
Page 50

City Council of Davao
29th Session
Series of 1956

Republic of the Philippines
DEPT OF DAVAO
Office of the City Council

ORDINANCE NO. 44

AN ORDINANCE REQUIRING THE USE OF MUNICIPAL MATERS OR OTHER CITY PRO-
PRTY NOT OPENLY USED FOR PUBLIC USE WHICH MAY BE USED FOR LUX
POWD OR FOR STRAIGHT OF LOTS AND PROVIDING A MUNICIPAL LICENSE FEE FOR
THE USE THEREOF.

Be it ordained by the City Council, City of Davao, that:

SECTION 1. - Regulating the use of Municipal Waters and Other
Properties. - Except as herein provided for, no portion of the Municipal
Maters within the Jurisdiction of Davao City or any other City property
shall be used for storing mfr/er depositing logs, and provided further,
that such use shall not endanger life and property, and/or obstruct na-
vigation, public drainage, public highways, fire protection and sanita-
tion.

SEC. 2. - Fees. - For every one (1) hectare or fraction thereof
of any portion of any Municipal Waters within the jurisdiction of Davao
City, or any public property that will be used for storing and/or de-
positing logs, a license fee of Two Hundred Pesos ($200.00) per annum
payable quarterly shall be paid to the City Treasurer, after issuance
of permit by the City Mayor upon recommendation of the City Engineer,
City Health Officer and the Chief of the Fire Department.

SEC. 3. - Definition of Terms. - "Municipal Waters" under this
Ordinance shall mean rivers, creeks, waterways, swamps, mouth of rivers
and the along the shoreline within the three (3) miles territorial limits.
SEC. 4. - Limitations of Permits. - (a) Where a permit is granted
for the use of the bank of the river, creek, or other internal waterways,
which is navigable or capable of navigation by water crafts of any size,
the permit shall be directed to the use of only one bank of said river,
creek or other internal waterways; provided, however, that the use of
such bank shall not in any way obstruct the navigation of such river or
cause impediment in case of flood that will endanger life and property.
(b) Persons to whom the use of any Municipal Water is granted shall
have the duty to see to it that the regulations are properly observed and

--- [Page 2] ---
-2-
Ordinance No. 14, series of 1956, cont'd:
shall take such precautions that the logs within such log pond shall
not be allowed to move freely, and for such failure of the permittees
to take proper precautions, he shall be liable for any damages to any
property caused by the logs which may have escaped from the area used
as log pond.
(e) All permits, rights and privileges granted by this Ordinance
shall be subject to the condition that should the use of any area as
log pond be conducive to the existence of floods or has caused damage
to the other riparian property owners, such permits shall be revoked
by the City Mayor after due investigation and hearing.
SEC. 4. - Final Provisions. - Any person, corporation, partnership,
organization who uses for storing and/or depositing logs any portion of
any of the municipal waters within the jurisdiction of Davie City, or
any other public property, without first securing a permit from the City
Mayor and paying the municipal license fee as provided under Section 2
hereof, shall be fined not more than Two Hundred Pesos ($200.00) or im-
prisonment for not more than six (6) months or both such fine and
imprisonment at the discretion of the Court.
SEC. 5. - Transitory Provisions. - This Ordinance shall not be ef-
fective upon areas, the use of which as log ponds had been previously
granted by the City of Davie under an administrative concession agreement;
provided, however, that upon the expiration of such administrative con-
cession agreement, said areas shall fall within the provisions of this
Ordinance and its use as log ponds shall be subject to the provisions
hereof.
SEC. 6. - Effectivity. - This Ordinance shall take effect ten
days after approval.
Enacted: June 22, 1956
ATTESTATION
By the Clerk of the Council
SECRETARY OF THE COUNCIL
APPROVED: June 26, 1956
Vice-Mayor
Presiding Officer
NOMINATED BY THE CITY OF DAVIE
Law
Attorney
