=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 0707-24 Amend Prevention, Treatment, Care and Support ===

--- [Page 1] ---
Republic of the Philippines
Office of the Sangguniang Panlungsod
City of Davao

20th City Council
45th Regular Session
Series of 2024

Present:
Vice Mayor J. Melchor B. Quitain Jr.
Councilor Marissa S. Abella
Councilor Nilo M. Abellera Jr.
Councilor Luna Maria Dominique S. Acosta
Councilor Bai Hundra Cassandra Dominique N. Advincula
Councilor Alvaro "Alag"
Councilor Dante A. Amurao Sr.
Councilor Conrad C. Baluran
Councilor Jessica M. Bonguyan
Councilor Louie John J. Bonguyan
Councilor Pilar C. Braga
Councilor Augusto Javier G. Campos III
Councilor Jonard C. Dayap
Councilor Januaray N. Duterte
Councilor Diodoro Benjamin Jr.
Councilor Diosdado Angelo Junior R. Mahipus
Councilor Rodolfo M. Mande
Councilor Bonz Andre A. Militar
Councilor Temujin B. Ocampo
Councilor Myrna G. D'Alado-Oritz
Councilor Alberto T. Ungab
Councilor Trinidad Benjamine D. Villafuete
Councilor Trinidad A. Villafuerte
Councilor Jesus Joseph P. Zozobraado III

Absent:
Councilor Wilberto E. Al-ag
Councilor Al Ryan S. Alejandre
Councilor Richlyn N. Justol-Baguilod
Councilor Kristine May John Abdul Mercado

Ordinance No. 0707-24
Series of 2024

An Ordinance Amending City Ordinance No. 041-02, Series of 2002, As Amended by City Ordinance No. 0679-19, Series of 2019, Promulgating Policies and Measures for the Prevention, Treatment, Care and Support of STI, HIV and AIDS in Davao City, Strengthening the Davao City AIDS Council, Appropriating Funds Therefor, and Providing Penalties for Violations Thereof and for Other Purposes

--- [Page 2] ---
Page 2 of 24  
Ord. No. 0707-24  

Be it ordained by the Sangguniang Panlungsod of Davao City in session assembled, that:  

Article I. Title of the Ordinance  

SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE. This Ordinance shall be known as the "DAVAO CITY COMPREHENSIVE STI, HIV AND AIDS ORDINANCE OF 2024."  

Article II. Declaration of Policy  

SECTION 1. Sexually Transmitted Infections, Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome (STIs, HIV and AIDS) are public health concerns that have wide ranging social, political and economic repercussions, as such:  

1. The City of Davao shall establish policies and programs to prevent the spread of STI, HIV and AIDS and deliver treatment, care and support services to persons living with HIV (PHIV) and those with Sexually Transmitted Infections (STIs) in accordance with evidence-based strategies and approaches that follow the principles of human rights, gender equality, and meaningful participation of communities affected by the epidemic;  

2. The City Government of Davao shall adopt a multi-sectoral and culturally-sensitive approach in responding to the STI, HIV and AIDS epidemic by ensuring that local communities, civil society groups, and persons living with HIV and their families are part of the response to the epidemic;  

3. The City Government of Davao shall ensure that STIs, HIV and AIDS-related services are accessible, available, affordable, and acceptable to those who need them. It shall also implement policies, programs, projects and activities that will contribute to eliminating stigma and discrimination;  

4. The City Government of Davao shall consistently adhere to generally-accepted principles of human rights and adopt gender perspectives in dealing with STIs, HIV and AIDS, as it shall employ scientifically-proven approaches in its information and education campaigns;  

Further, the City of Davao affirms that:  

1. The protection, promotion and fulfillment of human rights as the cornerstone of an effective response to the epidemic;  

2. The meaningful inclusion and participation of persons directly and indirectly affected by the epidemic, especially persons living with HIV is crucial in eliminating the virus;  

3. Unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance, the confidentiality, anonymity and non-compulsory nature of HIV testing and HIV-related testing shall always be guaranteed and protected by the City Government of Davao; and  

4. Policies and practices that discriminate on the basis of perceived or actual HIV status, sex, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, age, economic status, ethnicity and disability are inimical to national interest and contrary to the rights and freedoms guaranteed in the Constitution, and the City Government of Davao shall eliminate these acts of discrimination.

--- [Page 3] ---
Page 3 of 24
Ord. No. 0707-24

Article III. Definition of Terms

SECTION 1. DEFINITION OF TERMS. As used in this Ordinance, the following terms are defined as follows:

a. Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome (AIDS) refers to a health condition where there is a deficiency of the immune system that stems from infection with the Human Immunodeficiency Virus or HIV, making an individual susceptible to opportunistic infections;

b. Antiretroviral Therapy (ART) refers to the treatment that stops or suppresses viral replication or replications of a retrovirus like HIV, thereby slowing down the progression of infection;

c. Bullying refer to any severe or repeated use by one or more persons of a written, verbal or electronic expression, or a physical act of gesture, or any combination thereof, directed at another person that has the effect of actually causing or placing the latter in reasonable fear of physical or emotional harm or damage to one's property; creating a hostile environment for the other person; infringing on the rights of another person; or materially and substantially disrupting the processes or orderly operation of an institution or organization;

d. Children - refer to persons below 18 years of age or those over but are unable to fully take care of themselves or protect themselves from abuse, neglect, cruelty, exploitation or discrimination because of physical or mental disability or condition;

e. Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) refer to groups of non-governmental and non-commercial individuals or legal entities that are engaged in non-coerced collective action around shared interests, purpose and values;

f. Combination prevention is defined as the combination of HIV prevention as rights, evidence, and community-based programs that promote a combination of biomedical, behavioral, and structural interventions designed to meet the HIV prevention needs of specific people and communities;

g. Community-Based Research refers to studies undertaken in community settings, which involve community members in the design and implementation of research projects;

h. Community-led Monitoring is a process of collecting community feedback on the quality, accessibility, availability, and acceptability of services that will be stored, analyzed, and utilized for service improvement and advocacy for better programs and policies; collects experiences of stigma and discrimination, and other human rights violations; a tool that can contribute to the accountability of government and NGO stakeholders;

i. Comprehensive Health Interventions for Key Populations refers to evidence-based policies, programs, and approaches that aim to reduce transmission of HIV and its harmful consequences on health, social relations, and economic conditions;

j. Community-based HIV Screening refers to a non-laboratory rapid screening procedure done outside a health facility by a trained member of community-based organizations or groups;

--- [Page 4] ---
Page 4 of 24
Ord. No. 0707-24

k. Compulsory HIV Testing refers to HIV testing imposed upon an individual characterized by lack of consent, use of force or intimidation, the use of testing as a prerequisite for employment or other purposes, and other circumstances when informed choice is absent;

l. Discrimination refers to unfair or unjust treatment that distinguishes, excludes, restricts, or shows preferences based on any ground, such as sex, gender, age, sexual orientation, gender identity and expression, economic status, disability, ethnicity, and HIV status, whether actual or perceived, and which has the purpose or effect of nullifying or impairing the recognition, enjoyment or exercise by all persons similarly situated, of all their rights and freedoms;

m. Entertainment Establishments - are business establishments which include bars, nightclubs, beerhouses, karaoke bars/sing-along pub houses and other similar establishments within Davao City;

n. Ethics of Care - Healthcare provider embraces the universal values of liberty, justice, confidentiality, respect, gender equity and equality to clients;

o. Evolving Capacities of the Child refers to the concept enshrined in Article 5 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child recognizing the developmental changes and the corresponding progress in cognitive abilities and capacity for self-determination undergone by children as they grow up, thus requiring parents and others charged with the responsibility for the child to provide varying degrees of protection, and to allow their participation in opportunities for autonomous decision-making;

p. Faith-based Organization - refers to a group of individuals united on the basis of their religious or or spiritual beliefs;

q. Gender Expression refers to the way a person communicates gender identity to others through behavior, clothing, hairstyles, communication or speech pattern, or body characteristics;

r. Gender Identity refers to the personal sense of identity as characterized, among others, by manner of clothing, inclinations, and behavior in relation to masculine or feminine conventions. A person may have a male or female identity with the physiological characteristics of the opposite sex;

s. Health Certificate - is a written certification in the prescribed form issued by the City Health Officer stating that the person applying for or renewing such certificate, is permitted by the said Officer or his/her duly authorized representative to work in an establishment. The certificate shall be issued to the person applying for or renewing such, after undergoing/submitting proof of physical and medical examinations, immunizations and other examinations as may be required by the City Health Officer or his/her duly authorized representative;

t. Health Education, Promotion - refers to the conduct of information, education and promotion campaign and training on Reproductive Health, STI, HIV and AIDS and other related activities;

--- [Page 5] ---
Page 5 of 24  
Ord. No. 0707-24

u. Health Maintenance Organizations (HMO) refers to juridical entities legally organized to provide or arrange for the provision of pre-agreed or designated health care services to its enrolled members for a fixed prepaid fee for a specified period of time;

v. High-risk Behavior refers to a person's involvement in certain activities that increase the risk of transmitting or acquiring HIV;

w. Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) refers to the virus, of the type called retrovirus, which infects cells of the human immune system, and destroys or impairs the cells' function. Infection with HIV results in the progressive deterioration of the immune system, leading to immune deficiency;

x. HIV Counseling refers to the interpersonal and dynamic communication process between a client and a trained counselor, who is bound by a Code of Ethics and practice to resolve personal, social, or psychological problems and difficulties, and whose objective in counseling in the context of an HIV diagnosis is to encourage the client to explore important personal issues, identify ways of coping with anxiety and stress, plan for the future (keeping healthy, the context of a negative HIV test result, to encourage the client to explore motivations, options, and skills to stay HIV-negative;

y. HIV and AIDS Counselor refers to any individual trained by an institution or organization accredited by the Department of Health (DOH) to provide counseling services on HIV and AIDS with emphasis on behavior modification;

z. HIV and AIDS Monitoring refers to the documentation and analysis of the number of HIV and AIDS infections and the pattern of their spread;

aa. HIV-Negative refers to the absence of HIV or HIV antibodies upon HIV testing;

bb. HIV-Positive refers to the presence of HIV infection as documented by the presence of HIV and HIV antibodies in the sample being tested;

cc. HIV Self-Screening refers to the method that requires the person to collect his or her own specimen (oral fluid or blood) after which performs an HIV test using self-test kits, interpreting the result often in a private setting), either alone or with a trusted companion;

dd. HIV Testing refers to any facility-based, mobile medical procedure, or community-based screening modalities that are conducted to determine the presence or absence of HIV in a person's body. HIV testing is confidential, voluntary in nature, and must be accompanied by counseling prior to and after the testing, and is conducted only with the informed consent of the person;

ee. HIV-related Testing refers to any laboratory testing or procedure done on an individual in relation to a person's HIV condition;

ff. HIV Testing Facility refers to any DOH accredited on-site or mobile testing center, hospital, clinic, laboratory, and other facility that has the capacity to conduct voluntary HIV counseling and HIV testing;

gg. HIV Transmission refers to the transfer of HIV from one infected person to an uninfected individual, through unprotected sexual intercourse, blood transfusion, sharing of contaminated intravenous needles, or which may occur during pregnancy, delivery, and breastfeeding;

--- [Page 6] ---
Page 6 of 24
Ord. No. 0707-24

hh. Information Material - shall mean any written and/or printed material which educates the public;

ii. Informed Consent refers to the voluntary agreement of a person to undergo or be subjected to a procedure based on full information, whether such permission is written or conveyed verbally;

jj. Key Affected Populations refer to those groups or persons at higher risk of HIV exposure, or affected populations whose behavior make them likely to be exposed to HIV or to transmit the virus;

kk. Laboratory refers to an area or place, including community-based settings, where research studies are being undertaken to develop local evidence for effective HIV response;

Ii. Mature Minor Doctrine refers to the legal principle that recognizes the capacity of some minors to consent independently to medical procedures, if they have been assessed by qualified health professionals to understand the nature of procedures and their consequences to make a decision on their own;

mm. Medical Confidentiality refers to the core duty of medical practice where the information provided by the patient to health practitioner and his/her health status is kept private and is not divulged to third parties. The patient's health status can however, be shared with other medical practitioners involved in the professional care of the patient, who will also be bound by medical confidentiality. Medical confidentiality applies to the attending physician, consulting medical specialist, nurse, medical technologist and all other health workers providing services to the patient, including teachers or professional care of the patient. It also applies to any person who, in any official capacity, has acquired or may have acquired such confidential information;

nn. Medical Practitioner - licensed Doctor of Medicine engaged in health work in hospitals, clinics, sanitaria, health stations, barangay health centers and the like;

oo. Non-health (social determinants of health) refers to non-medical factors that influence health outcomes; these are the conditions in which people are born, grow, work, live, and age, and the wider set of forces and systems shaping the conditions of daily life. These forces and systems include economic policies and systems, development agendas, social norms, social policies, and political systems;

pp. Opportunistic infections refer to illnesses caused by various organism, many of which do not cause diseases in persons with healthy immune system;

qq. Partner Notification refers to the process by which the "index client", "source", or "patient" who has a Sexually Transmitted Infection (STI) including HIV, is given support in order to notify and advise the partners that have been exposed to infection. Support includes giving the index client a mechanism to encourage the client's partner to attend counseling, testing and other prevention and treatment services. Confidentiality shall be observed in the entire process;

rr. Peer Educator - is a trained STI, HIV and AIDS educator who is capable of influencing, motivating and developing healthy behaviors among his/her peers;

--- [Page 7] ---
Page 7 of 24
Ord. No. 0707-24
ss. Person Living with HIV (PLHIV) refers to any individual diagnosed to be infected with HIV;
tt. Pre-exposure Prophylaxis refers to the use of prescription drugs as a strategy for the prevention of HIV infection by people who do not have the HIV and AIDS. It is an optional treatment, which may be taken by people who are HIV-negative but who have substantial, higher-than-average risk of contracting an HIV infection;
uu. Pre-test Counseling refers to the process of providing an individual with information on the biomedical aspects of HIV, AIDS, and emotional support to any psychological implications of undergoing HIV testing and the test result itself before the individual is subjected to the test;
vv. Post-exposure Prophylaxis refers to a preventive medical treatment started immediately after exposure to pathogen (HIV) in order to prevent infection by the pathogen and the development of the disease;
ww. Post-test Counseling refers to the process of providing risk-reduction information and emotional support to a person who submitted to HIV testing at the time the result is released;
xx. Prophylactic refers to any agent or device used to prevent the transmission of an infection;
yy. Provider-initiated Counseling and Testing refers to a health care provider initiating HIV testing to a person practicing high-risk behavior or vulnerable to HIV after conducting HIV pre-test counseling. A person may elect to decline or defer testing such that consent is conditional;
zz. Quality Health Care - as indicated in the standards set by the World Health Organization (WHO), accessibility and affordability of medical needs, ethical care, and appropriateness of provider's knowledge on STI, HIV and AIDS, sexual and reproductive health rights, gender sensitivity in their interpersonal relations with patients and adopt diagnostic treatment and follow-up procedure of health providers;
aaa. Redress refers to an act of compensation for unfairness, grievance, and reparation;
bbb. Reproductive Health - It is a state of complete physical, mental, and social well-being and not merely the absence of disease and infirmity in all matters relating to the reproductive system and its functions and processes. It implies that people are able to have satisfying and safe sex lives and they have the capability to reproduce and freedom to decide if, when, and how often to do so as defined in the Cairo International Conference on Population and Development (CICPD) and World Health Organization (WHO);
ccc. Reproductive Health and Wellness Center (RHWC) - A primary healthcare facility under the local government of the City of Davao that serves at the forefront of STI, HIV and AIDS prevention, treatment, care and support. Its purpose is to achieve universal availability, affordability, accessibility of reproductive health care services;

--- [Page 8] ---
Page 8 of 24  
Ord. No. 0707-24  

ddd. Safer Sex Practices refer to choices made and behaviors adopted by a person to reduce or minimize the risk of HIV transmission. This may include postponing sexual debut, non-penetrative sex, correct and consistent use of male or female condoms, and reducing the number of sexual partners;  

eee. Sexual Health implies that the sexual drive and sexual processes are accomplished in a state of complete physical, mental, and social being, not merely the absence of disease or disorder;  

fff. Sexually Transmitted Infections (STIs) refer to infections that are spread through the transfer of organisms from one person to another as a result of sexual contact;  

ggg. Sexual Orientation refers to the direction of emotional, sexual attraction, conduct towards people of the same sex (homosexual orientation) or towards people of both sexes (bisexual orientation) or towards people of the opposite sex (heterosexual orientation) or to the absence of sexual attraction (asexual orientation);  

hhh. Social Protection refers to a set of policies and programs designed to reduce poverty and vulnerability by promoting efficient labor markets, diminishing people's exposure to risks, and enhancing their capacity to protect themselves against hazards, and interruptions on, or loss of income;  

iii. Standard Precautions refer to work practices required to reduce the risk of transmission of blood-borne and other pathogens from both recognized and unrecognized sources to protect the health care worker and client;  

jjj. STI, HIV and AIDS Workplace Policies refer to the statement of provisions of work and health benefits and rights for workers/employees;  

kkk. Stigma refers to the dynamic devaluation and dehumanization of an individual in the eyes of others, which may be based on attributes that are arbitrarily defined by others as discreditable or unworthy, and which results in discrimination when acted upon;  

III. Treatment hubs refer to private and public hospitals or medical establishments accredited by DOH to have the capacity and facility to provide treatment and care services to PLHIV;  

mmm. Voluntary HIV testing refers to HIV testing done on an individual who, after having undergone pre-test counseling, willingly submits to such test;  

nnn. Vulnerable Communities refer to the communities and groups suffering from vulnerabilities, such as unequal opportunities, social exclusion, poverty, unemployment, and other similar social, economic, cultural, and political conditions making them more susceptible to STI, HIV and AIDS; (RA 11166)  

ooo. Workplace refers to the office premises and work site where workers are habitually employed and shall include the office or place where workers, with no fixed or definite work site, regularly report for assignment in the course of their employment;

--- [Page 9] ---
Page 9 of 24
Ord. No. 0707-24

Article IV. The Davao City AIDS Council (DCAC), the DCAC Secretariat, and the City Health Office - Reproductive Health and Wellness Center

SECTION 1. The Davao City AIDS Council (DCAC) shall be created through an Executive Order issued by the City Mayor.

The Council shall be the Lead, Oversight, Advisory, Coordinative, and Monitoring and Evaluation Body of the City's STI, HIV, and AIDS and related policies, plans, programs, and activities.

SECTION 2. The DCAC shall have the following powers and functions:

a. Lead in ensuring and coordinating the crafting, operationalization, and implementation of the City's strategic, medium-term, operational, investment, and other plans, programs, and policies related to STI, HIV, and AIDS;

b. Recommend measures to the Local Health Board (LHB), City Development Council, City Mayor, and Sangguniang Panlungsod in adopting, formulating, developing, reviewing, and updating of policies, plans, or programs towards achieving the City's STI, HIV, and AIDS targets;

c. Oversee the coordination and undertaking of STI, HIV, and AIDS prevention programs, including information, education, and communication; research; provision of screening, testing, and counselling; as well as ensuring provision of health and other support services;

d. Lead the monitoring, assessment, and evaluation of the operationalization and implementation of the operationalization and the policies, plans, and programs relative thereto; the City's implementation of its mandates as set in the national policies and international commitments including the Philippine HIV and AIDS Policy Act, the AIDS Medium Term Plan, among others, and/or compliance, operationalization, and/or actions of local bodies with this Council's policies, resolutions, and recommendations;

e. Coordinate the establishment, mobilization, and strengthening of local, national and international linkages with stakeholders involved in STI, HIV, and AIDS response;

f. By itself, through its Chairperson or any of its authorized members, partner, or engage with, or secure assistance or services of public, private, non-government/civil society organizations in pursuit of its mandates, subject to existing laws and regulations;

g. Consistent with the structure provided in this Ordinance, adopt its operational and functional structure, form committees and subcommittees, working groups, define respective roles and responsibilities in furtherance of its mandates;

h. Oversee the reconstitution of the DCAC Secretariat, its staffing pattern, and its operations, through its Chairperson, or its duly authorized Officer or Member;

i. Propose budget for its operations and that of its Secretariat;

--- [Page 10] ---
Page 10 of 24  
Ord. No. 0707-24  

j. Adopt its own rules, resolutions, and recommendations in furtherance of the above powers and functions.  

SECTION 3. COMPOSITION OF THE DAVAO CITY AIDS COUNCIL (DCAC):  
To realize the above mandates, the Davao City AIDS Council shall be composed of the following:  

Chairperson - the City Mayor or his/her duly Authorized Representative  
Vice Chair - Chairperson, SP Committee on Health  
Members - City Health Officer  
- City Social Welfare and Development Officer  
- Department of Education Davao City Schools Division Superintendent  
- Davao City Liga ng mga Barangay President  
- Integrated Gender and Development Officer  
- City Information Officer  
- City Director of the DILG  
- Sangguniang Kabataan Federation President  
- Department of Health Representative  
- Davao City Human Affairs Officer  
- DCAC Head Secretary  

Secretariat: There shall be a secretariat which shall be composed of the following:  
1. Reproductive Health and Wellness Center Head Physician  
2. Supervising Nurse  
3. Two (2) Administrative Staff  

The above-mentioned members shall have an alternate representative in the activities of DCAC during their absence.  

A. There shall be Ten (10) CSO Representatives, in accordance with the DILG requirements, coming from the following groups:  
o 1. LGBTQI+ Organization  
o 2. Faith-based Organization  
o 3. Indigenous Peoples Organization (as endorsed by the City Mayor's Office-City Cultural Minority Office)  
o 1. Young Key Population Organization (YKPO)  
o 1. Organization of or serving Persons with Disability (PVD) the vulnerable communities  
o 1. CSO serving women and children or working on health of these key populations  
o 1. CSO serving (key population) LGBTQI+, PLHIVs and working on health of the key populations  
o 1. Academic - A higher learning institution that conducts research and development and a committed partner in Policy Advocacy and service provision to the key population and the PLHIV in Davao Region;  

B. Criteria and Guidelines in the Selection of CSO and the Academe as AIDS Council Member.  
1. The CSO must be an NGO or PO accredited by the LGU;

--- [Page 11] ---
Page 11 of 24  
Ord. No. 0707-24

2. The CSO must have the commitment to HIV and AIDS advocacy, prevention, and psychosocial care to KP and the PHLV;  
3. The CSO must have shown a track record of implementing a project on prevention, treatment, and support;  
4. The Academe must have a program on HIV and AIDS and related research (for the prospective academical member);  

C. CSO Autonomy, Selection, and Representation - The DCAC shall respect and ensure CSO autonomy in selecting their respective representatives to the Council. The CSOs must develop their own process of selecting their representative to the City AIDS Council. The CSO Representative shall conform to the guidelines set by DILG and the LGU. The CSOs shall also have an alternate representative in the activities of the DCAC during the absence of their permanent representative.  

D. Terms of Office of CSO Member to the AIDS Council - The CSO member of the AIDS Council shall serve as a council member for at least 3 terms. Each term is equivalent to a three-year period. Membership to the AIDS Council shall be done with formal application and endorsement from the Sector they represent. Applications shall be done every after one term of service.

SECTION 4. MEETINGS OF THE AIDS COUNCIL -  
The DCAC shall regularly convene quarterly for the conduct of its affairs. There shall be two meetings of the DCAC which shall be held in Plenary, while the other two (2) meetings shall be held by the respective committees or working groups.  
The AIDS Council may convene a special meeting upon the call of the Chair or the Co-Chair or upon request of at least the majority number of its members.  
Except when in Executive Session, or when authorized by law, the DCAC Meetings shall be open to the public. The DCAC may likewise invite institutions, organizations, civil societies, and agencies in its meetings for them to serve as resource persons or when their participation is deemed relevant and necessary.  

SECTION 5. SECRETARIAT OF THE DAVAO CITY AIDS COUNCIL AND ITS FUNCTIONS -  
Sufficient personnel shall be assigned and constituted as Secretariat of the DCAC and shall perform the following functions:  
1. Assist and provide technical and administrative support to the DCAC, its Chair, its Members, and the respective leads of Committees, Sub-Committees or Working Groups in the performance of their functions;  
2. Serve as the communication center of the DCAC;  
3. Serve as custodian of records and repository of all data and information pertaining to the City's response to STI, HIV, and AIDS, the DCAC, and the DCAC operations – including meetings, activities, programs, projects, among others; and  
4. Perform other secretarial functions as may be assigned by the Chairperson of the Council or authorized officers;

--- [Page 12] ---
Page 12 of 24  
Ord. No. 0707-24  

SECTION 6. The City Health Office - Reproductive Health and Wellness Center (CHO-RHWCC) shall be the City's frontline provider and primary facility for delivery of comprehensive reproductive health including STI, HIV, AIDS services, such as diagnostic testing, treatment, care, and support.  

The CHO-RHWCC shall provide reports and updates of the City's STI, HIV and AIDS trends, responses, services, and treatments to the DCAC, the CHO-CESS, and the general public.  

To strengthen the CHO-RHWCC and enable it to accomplish its mandates herein set forth, the City Government shall provide the CHO-RHWCC adequate personnel, facilities, and sufficient and responsive budget.  

Article V. STI, HIV and AIDS Prevention  

SECTION 1. STI, HIV AND AIDS PREVENTION - The City Government of Davao, through the Davao City AIDS Council (DCAC), shall promote and adopt a range of measures and interventions in partnership with civil society organizations and other government agencies that aims to prevent, halt or control the spread of STI, HIV, and AIDS in the general population, especially among key populations and vulnerable communities.  

SECTION 2. STI, HIV AND AIDS AWARENESS CAMPAIGN - The DCAC shall conduct whole year-round activities on STI, HIV and AIDS Awareness Campaign which officially starts in January, highlighting the month of May, the International AIDS Candlelight Memorial and Mobilization (IACMM) and the month of December being the World AIDS Day prevention month and the conduct of an annual HIV summit.  

SECTION 3. STI, HIV AND AIDS PREVENTION PROGRAM - The HIV and AIDS Education and Prevention programs shall be age-appropriate, culture-sensitive, gender-responsive and based on up-to-date evidence and scientific strategies, and shall actively promote:  

(a) Safer sex practices among the general population, including sexual abstinence, sexual fidelity, and consistent and correct condom use especially among key populations;  

(b) Other practices that reduce risk of HIV infection;  

(c) Universal awareness of and access to evidence-based and relevant information and education, and medically safe, legally affordable, effective, and quality treatment; and  

(d) Knowledge of the health, civil, political, economic, and social rights of PLHIV and their families.  

The CHO-RHWCC, based on up-to-date evidence, scientific strategies, technologies, and/or interventions, shall procure, distribute, and monitor the usage of a range of biomedical interventions for the prevention and control of STI, HIV, and AIDS, including condoms and lubricants, pre- and post-exposure prophylaxis medicines, and other prevention and treatment commodities, ensure sufficiency and accessibility of the same in government and/or private facilities as informed by local situation among the general and key affected populations, including children born of PLHIV mothers, sex workers/ people in prostitution, and indigent MSM, among others.

--- [Page 13] ---
**Page 13 of 24**

**Ord. No.0707-24**

**SECTION 4. COMPREHENSIVE STI, HIV AND AIDS EDUCATION**

Comprehensive education and information strategies shall be designed, integrated and adopted in various levels geared towards the purpose of providing substantial information/knowledge, improving attitudes and skills in the prevention and control of STI, HIV and AIDS, in both public and private spheres.

**SECTION 5. STI, HIV AND AIDS INFORMATION AS A HEALTH SERVICE**

The STI, HIV and AIDS education and information dissemination shall form part of the delivery of health services practitioners, workers and personnel. The knowledge and capabilities of all public health workers shall be enhanced to include skills for proper information dissemination and education on STI, HIV and AIDS. It shall likewise be considered a civic duty of health providers in the private sector to make available to the public such information and education as is necessary to control the spread of STI, HIV and AIDS and to correct common misconceptions and other related ethical issues such as confidentiality, informed consent and the duty to provide treatment.

**SECTION 6. STI, HIV AND AIDS EDUCATION FOR KEY POPULATIONS AND VULNERABLE COMMUNITIES**

- Health Promotion Unit (HPU), in collaboration with the Lupa ng mga Barangay, Civil Society Organizations and other government agencies, shall support and ensure STI, HIV and AIDS education programs such as peer education and outreach activities, and community-based screening services to reach target key populations and vulnerable communities.

**SECTION 7. STI, HIV AND AIDS GENDER AND CULTURALLY SENSITIVE IEC MATERIALS AND EDUCATION MODULES**

- Information, Education and Communication (IEC) materials shall be designed appropriate to the needs and culture of groups being targeted. The IEC materials shall be translated into the local language to encourage and facilitate easy understanding of terms and concepts. Proper consultations shall be held among heads, leaders and representatives of respective groups, organizations, institutions and individuals who are targets for application of any course content, scope and methodology.

**SECTION 8. AGE-APPROPRIATE STI, HIV AND AIDS EDUCATION IN SCHOOLS**

- The DCAC, through CHO-HPU, shall coordinate with the relevant City Departments or Offices and the Department of Education (DepEd), Commission on Higher Education (CHED), and the Technical Education Skills and Development Authority (TESDA) to integrate basic and age-appropriate and culturally sensitive instruction on the causes, modes of transmission and ways of preventing the spread of HIV and other Sexually Transmitted Infections in subjects taught in public and private schools, including formal and indigenous learning systems.

**SECTION 9. STI, HIV AND AIDS EDUCATION IN THE WORKPLACE**

- The DCAC, through the CHO-HPU, in coordination with the relevant City Departments or Offices and the Department of Labor and Employment (DOLE) and the Civil Service Commission (CSC), shall provide standard basic Information and Instruction on STI, HIV and AIDS, national and local HIV related laws and other related issues of stigma reduction and discrimination in the workplace, public and private, including the Armed Forces of the Philippines (AFP) and the Philippine National Police (PNP).

**SECTION 10. COMPULSORY STI, HIV AND AIDS EDUCATION**

- It shall be compulsory for all owners and/or managers of all establishments to attend seminar on STI, HIV and AIDS prevention conducted regularly by any of the agencies such as the CHO, DCAC, and accredited Civil Society Organizations (CSOs), otherwise, no renewal of permit to operate shall be granted to said establishments for violation thereof.

--- [Page 14] ---
Page 14 of 24
Ord. No. 0707-24

A Certificate of Attendance to STI, HIV, and AIDS Seminar shall form part of the requirements for the issuance or renewal of Health Certificate and Permit to Operate.

SECTION 11. STI, HIV AND AIDS EDUCATION FOR OVERSEAS FILIPINO WORKERS - The DCAC, through the CSWD/O-Office of the Overseas Filipino Workers Families Welfare and Crisis Center, shall coordinate with the relevant City Departments or Offices and its attached agencies, the Department of Migrant Workers (DMW) and Overseas Workers Welfare Administration (OWWA), to ensure that all overseas Filipino workers shall be provided with information on STI, HIV, and AIDS and how to access on-site the related services and facilities before certification of overseas assignment.

SECTION 12. STI, HIV AND AIDS EDUCATION IN COMMUNITIES - The CHO, through the HPU, the Liga ng mga Barangay, the Barangay Council for the Protection of Children (BCCP), the Sanggunian Kabataan and other CSOs shall spearhead Education and Information Activities for public awareness campaigns on STI, HIV and AIDS through various channels on evidence-based, gender sensitive, age-appropriate, culturally sensitive and human rights-oriented prevention tools to stop the spread of STI and HIV.

SECTION 13. STI, HIV AND AIDS EDUCATION AMONG OUT-OF-SCHOOL YOUTH (OSY) - The CHO, through the HPU and City Social Welfare and Development Office (CSWD/O), CSOs and other accredited agencies, shall provide trainings or seminars on STI, HIV and AIDS and other related issues on Adolescent Reproductive Health (ARH) to all OSY and young people in coordination with Sanggunian Kabataan (SK) officials in the Barangay. For this purpose, SK shall integrate and provide budget for STI and HIV in their plans, programs and activities.

SECTION 14. STI, HIV AND AIDS EDUCATION FOR TOURISTS AND TRANSIENTS - The CHO/HPU, CIO and City Tourism Office shall conduct Information Education and provide IEC materials on the cause, modes of transmission, prevention and consequences of STI and HIV Infection and list of STI, HIV testing facilities which shall be adequately provided at all domestic and international ports of entry and exit.

SECTION 15. STI, HIV AND AIDS PREVENTION, TREATMENT, CARE AND SUPPORT IN PRISON AND OTHER CLOSED-SETTING INSTITUTIONS - The CHO, HPU, RHWC and other accredited CSOs, in coordination with the relevant City Departments or Offices and the Bureau of Corrections, Bureau of Jail Management and Penology, Department of Social Welfare and Development or such proper authorities, shall ensure that all prisons, public and private rehabilitation centers, and other closed-setting institutions shall have comprehensive STI, HIV and AIDS prevention, treatment, care and support program.

SECTION 16. COMPULSORY STI, HIV AND AIDS EDUCATION FOR MARRIAGE APPLICANTS - The CHO, through the Population Division in partnership with CSWD/O and IGDD and other implementing agencies, shall integrate STI, HIV and AIDS and gender sensitivity education among marriage applicants.

SECTION 17. MEDIA CAMPAIGN ON STI, HIV AND AIDS PREVENTION - The CIO, in partnership with CHO/HPU in coordination and the various media organizations, shall implement a media and communications plan including STI, HIV and AIDS education among media practitioners and regular information dissemination campaign and advocacy.

--- [Page 15] ---
**Page 15 of 24  
Ord. No. 0707-24**

**SECTION 18. STI, HIV AND AIDS PREVENTION OF MOTHER-TO-CHILD TRANSMISSION - The CHO shall integrate STI and HIV Prevention of Mother to Child Transmission (PMCTC) in its maternal and child health services.**

**SECTION 19. STI, HIV AND AIDS PREVENTION OF BLOOD RELATED TRANSMISSION - The CHO, in coordination with the DOH Blood Program, PRC, Hospitals, Clinics and Laboratories, shall adopt and implement the guidelines and other existing ordinances on blood, tissue or organ donation.**

**SECTION 20. STANDARD PRECAUTION - All Health Care Providers implementing STI and HIV programs shall adopt standard precautions according to the existing DOH guidelines.**

**Article VI. Screening, Testing and Counseling**

**SECTION 1. As a policy, the City Government of Davao, through the DCAC, shall encourage voluntary HIV testing. Written consent from the person must be obtained before taking the test.**

**HIV testing must be made available under the following circumstances:**

a. In keeping with the principle of the evolving capacities of the child as defined in Section 3 (1) of this Act. If the person is fifteen (15) to below eighteen (18) years of age, consent to voluntary HIV testing shall be obtained from the child without the need of consent from a parent or guardian;

b. In keeping with the mature minor doctrine as defined in Section 3 (mm) of this Act, any young person aged below fifteen (15) who is pregnant or engaged in high-risk behavior shall be eligible for HIV testing and counseling, with the assistance of a licensed social worker or health worker. Consent to voluntary HIV testing shall be obtained from the child without the need of consent from a parent or guardian;

c. In all other cases not covered by (b) of this Section, consent to voluntary HIV testing shall be obtained from the child's parents or legal guardian if the person is below fifteen (15) years of age or is mentally incapacitated. In cases when the child's parents or legal guardian cannot be located despite reasonable efforts, or if the child's parents or legal guardian refused to give consent, it shall be obtained from the licensed social worker or health worker. To protect the best interest of the child, the assent of the minor shall also be required prior to the testing.

In every circumstance, proper counseling shall be conducted by the social worker, a health care provider, or other health care professional accredited by DOH or DSWD.

HIV testing guidelines issued by DOH shall include guidance for testing minors and for the involvement of parents or guardians in HIV testing for minors.

The City Government of Davao, through the DCAC, shall comply with and continually review and revise as appropriate, the HIV diagnostic algorithm based on national regulations and current available laboratory technology and evidence.

**SECTION 2. Compulsory HIV Testing - Compulsory HIV Testing shall be allowed only in the following instances:**

--- [Page 16] ---
Page 16 of 24
Ord No. 0707-24

a. When it is necessary to test a person who is charged with any of the offenses punishable under Articles 264 and 265 on serious and slight physical injuries, and Articles 335 and 338 on rape and simple seduction, both of Republic Act No. 3815, or the "Revised Penal Code", as amended, and as also amended by Republic Act No. 8353, otherwise known as the "Anti-Rape Law of 1997";

b. When it is necessary to resolve relevant issues under Executive Order No. 209, otherwise known as the "Family Code of the Philippines"; and

c. As a prerequisite of the donation of blood in compliance with the provisions of Republic Act No. 7170, otherwise known as the "Organ Donation Act of 1991," and Republic Act No. 7179, otherwise known as the "National Blood Services Act of 1994."

SECTION 3. MECHANISMS AND STANDARDS OF ROUTINE "PROVIDER - INITIATED AND CLIENT-INITIATED HIV COUNSELING AND TESTING" To implement this Section, the DOH shall:

a. Accredite public and private HIV testing facilities based on the capacity to deliver testing services including HIV counseling: Provided, that only DOH-accredited HIV testing facilities shall be allowed to conduct HIV testing;

b. Develop the guidelines for HIV counseling and testing, including mobile HIV counseling and testing, and routine provider-initiated HIV counseling and testing that shall ensure among others, that HIV testing is based on informed consent, is voluntary and confidential, is available at all times, and is provided by qualified persons and DOH-accredited providers;

c. Accredite institutions or organizations to train HIV and AIDS counselors in coordination with CSWDO;

d. Accredite competent HIV and AIDS counselors for Persons with Disability, including, but not limited to, transgenders for the hearing impaired and Braille for the visually impaired clients, in coordination with the Persons with Disabilities Affairs Office (PDPO);

e. Set the standards for HIV counseling and shall work closely with HIV and AIDS CSOs that train HIV and AIDS counselors and peer educators, in coordination and participation of CSOs and other Government Agencies of PLHIV (CSO-PLHIV); and

f. Ensure access to routine provider-initiated counseling and testing as part of clinical care in all health care settings for the public.

All HIV testing facilities shall provide free pre-test and post-test HIV counseling to individuals who wish to avail of HIV testing, which shall likewise be confidential. No HIV testing shall be conducted without informed consent. The City Government of Davao shall ensure that specific approaches to HIV counseling and testing are adopted based on the nature and extent of HIV and AIDS incidence in the country.

Pre-test counseling and post-test counseling shall be done by the HIV and AIDS counselor, licensed social worker, licensed health service provider, or a DOH-accredited health service provider: Provided, that the government testing facility for pre-test and post-test counseling shall be provided for free.

--- [Page 17] ---
**Page 17 of 24  
Ord. No. 0707-24**

**SECTION 4. HIV TESTING FOR PREGNANT WOMEN - A healthcare provider who offers prenatal medical care shall offer provider-initiated HIV testing for pregnant women. Provided that any pregnant women who refuse to avail of HIV testing shall not be denied pre- or ante-natal services. The DOH shall provide the necessary guidelines for healthcare providers in the conduct of the screening procedure.**

**Article VII. STI, HIV AND AIDS Treatment, Psychosocial Care and Support**

**SECTION 1. PSYCHOSOCIAL CARE AND SUPPORT TO PERSONS LIVING WITH HIV AND AFFECTED FAMILIES: The City Government of Davao, through the CHO-RHMM, treatment hubs and other HIV support groups, shall ensure availability, affordability, accessibility, and treatment of STI and HIV to Persons Living with HIV and provide education on adherence to treatment. The CSWDQ, in coordination with DSWD and other service providers, shall provide psychosocial care and support programs to PLHIV and affected families.**

**SECTION 2. CARE AND SUPPORT FOR OVERSEAS WORKERS LIVING WITH HIV: The CSWDQ, in coordination with OWWA, DMW, DOH, CHO, DSWD, and CSOs, shall develop a stigma-free comprehensive reintegration, care, and support program including economic, social, and medical support for overseas workers who have been repatriated or are about to be repatriated due to their HIV positive status.**

**SECTION 3. SPECIAL CARE AND SUPPORT SERVICES FOR PREGNANT WOMEN WITH STI, HIV AND AIDS: The CHO, through its Mental Health Programs in coordination with CSDWO and other accredited agencies/institutions shall provide special care and support services for pregnant women with STI, HIV and AIDS and shall be integrated in the development plans and activities of the department.**

**SECTION 4. SPECIAL CARE AND SUPPORT SERVICES FOR CHILDREN INFECTED WITH HIV AND CHILDREN OF PERSONS LIVING WITH HIV AND AIDS: Treatment hubs, in coordination with CSDWO and other accredited institutions, shall provide psychosocial care and other interventions at the best interest of the child.**

**SECTION 5. SPECIAL CARE AND SUPPORT FOR ABUSED WOMEN, MEN, CHILDREN AND PERSONS WITH DISABILITY INFECTED WITH STI, HIV AND AIDS: The CHO, in coordination with the ICDR, CSWDQ, Public Attorney's Office and DCPO-WPO, and CSOs, shall facilitate legal services to abused women, men, children and Persons with Disability infected with STI, HIV and AIDS.**

**SECTION 6. ASSESSMENT AND REFERRAL FOR SOCIAL WELFARE SERVICES TO PERSONS LIVING WITH HIV: The CSWDQ shall assess and refer PLHIV to avail of social welfare services.**

**Article VIII. Health and Support Services**

**SECTION 1. UNIVERSAL ACCESS TO STI, HIV AND AIDS HEALTHCARE SERVICES: Access to STI, HIV and AIDS healthcare services/assistance shall be extended to all individuals regardless of sex, gender, sexual orientation, age, social status, political belief, tradition, and religion.**

**SECTION 2. ADHERENCE TO QUALITY HEALTH CARE AND ETHICS OF CARE: Medical Practitioners or other staff assisting or directly providing health services/entertainable/education to clients shall adhere to the basic principles and ethics of care. They shall also be sensitive to gender and sexual orientation in their treatment of patients/clients, ensuring respect of their rights, including the right to file charges for abuses committed against them.**

--- [Page 18] ---
**Page 18 of 24  
Ord. No. 0707-24**

**SECTION 3. SERVICE DELIVERY NETWORK**  
The City Government of Davao, through the DCAC, shall establish a service delivery network that is an integrated service delivery system that addresses the needs of clients in the continuum of prevention, testing, management of treatment, and psychosocial care coordinated across levels and sites of service delivery within and beyond the health sector.

**SECTION 4. PARTNERSHIPS WITH CIVIL SOCIETY ORGANIZATIONS**  
The City Government of Davao, the DCAC, or any of the Council's Members, shall ensure that local communities, civil society groups, and organizations of people living with HIV and their families are part of the local HIV/AIDS response.

In addition to ensuring representation and substantive participation of the key affected populations and their organizations in policy-making, direction-setting, planning, and programming, the City Mayor or his authorized representative, subject to existing rules and regulations, may enter into agreements with, engage, procure, or secure the services of, establish partnerships or joint-initiatives with Civil Society Organizations, PLHIV organizations, or organizations of key affected populations, in the delivery of health or non-health services in the HIV continuum of care.

**Article IX. STI, HIV AND AIDS Surveillance and Monitoring**

**SECTION 1. MONITORING, DOCUMENTATION AND REPORTING MECHANISM**  
The DCAC, through CHO-CESU and CSOs, shall develop a comprehensive STI, HIV, and AIDS monitoring and evaluation programs that will serve the following purposes:

a. Determine and monitor the magnitude and progression of HIV and AIDS in the City to help the national government evaluate the adequacy and efficacy of HIV prevention and treatment programs being employed;

b. Receive, collate, progress, and evaluate all medical reports related to HIV and AIDS from all hospitals, clinics, laboratories, and testing centers, including HIV-related deaths relevant data from public and private hospitals, various data banks, or other systems as systemized, and it shall adopt a coding system that ensures anonymity and confidentiality;

c. Monitor performance commitment of accredited treatment hubs, and ensure provision of all services as stipulated in the treatment guidelines;

d. Submit to DCAC, through its Secretariat, an annual report containing the findings of its monitoring and evaluation activities in compliance with this mandate.

**SECTION 2. RESEARCH INVESTIGATION**  
The DCAC, through CHO-CESU, CHO-HPU, and CPDO, by itself, or in partnership with the Department of Health, academia, CSO, or research institutions, shall conduct STI, HIV, and AIDS related researches and studies as basis in planning, policy making advocacy as needed.

**Article X. STI, HIV AND AIDS Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation**

**SECTION 1. HIV AND AIDS 3-YEAR PLAN**  
The DCAC shall develop and adopt a 3-year Plan on STI, HIV, and AIDS, Investment Plan, and Annual Operational Plan and Budget. The Annual Operational Plan with budget shall be developed and passed to the Council for approval every third quarter of the present year. The plan shall include the activities related to Advocacy, Prevention, World AIDS Day, and Candlelight Memorial Commemoration.

--- [Page 19] ---
**Page 19 of 24  
Ord. No. 0707-24**

**SECTION 2. MONITORING, EVALUATION AND REPORTING -** The DCAC shall ensure monitoring and evaluation of the City's STI, HIV and AIDS 3-year operational and implementation plans.

It shall report annually to the Office of the City Mayor, City Council and its own members on the status of the annual operational and implementation of the 3-year plans as well as STI, HIV and AIDS situation in Davao City.

The DCAC shall integrate into its monitoring, evaluation, planning, and reporting such pieces of evidence, processes, data, information, results, and recommendations emanating from independent sources, researches, and initiatives, including community-led monitoring efforts as basis for developing, shaping, and updating strategies, plans, projects, activities and allocation of resources.

**Article XI. Discriminatory Acts and Practices**

**SECTION 1. The following Discriminatory Acts and Practices shall be prohibited:**

a. Discrimination in the Workplace - The rejection of job application, termination of employment, or other discriminatory policies in hiring, provision of employment, and other related benefits, promotion or assignment of an individual, solely or partially on the basis of actual, perceived or suspected HIV status.

b. Discrimination in Learning Institutions - Refusal of admission, expulsion, segregation, imposition of harsher disciplinary actions or denial of services and benefits of a student or prospective student solely or partially on the basis of actual, perceived or suspected HIV status.

c. Restrictions on Travel and Habitation - Restrictions on travel within the Philippines, refusal of lawful entry to Philippine territory, deportation from the Philippines or the quarantine or enforced isolation of travelers solely or partially on account of actual, perceived or suspected HIV status is discriminatory. The same standard of protection shall be accorded to migrants, visitors and residents who are not Filipino citizens.

d. Restriction on Shelter - Restrictions on housing and lodging, whether permanent or temporary, solely or partially on the basis of actual, perceived or suspected HIV status.

e. Prohibition on Seeking or Holding Public Office - Prohibition on the right to seek an elective or appointive public office, solely or partially on the basis of actual, perceived or suspected HIV status.

f. Exclusion from Credit and Insurance Services - Exclusion from health, accident or life insurance, or credit and loan services, including the extension of such loan, or insurance facilities, of an individual solely or partially on the basis of actual, perceived or suspected HIV status: Provided that the PLHIV has not concealed or misrepresented the fact to the insurance company or loan or credit service provider upon application.

g. Discriminations in Hospitals and Health Institutions - Denial of health services, or being charged with a higher fee on the basis of actual, perceived or suspected HIV status is discriminatory acts, and is prohibited.

--- [Page 20] ---
Page 20 of 24
Ord. No. 0707-24
h. Denial of Burial Services - Denial of embalming or burial services for a deceased person who had HIV and AIDS or who was known, suspected or perceived to be HIV positive;
i. Act of bullying - Bullying in all forms, including name-calling, upon a person based on actual, suspected or perceived to be HIV positive, including bullying in social media and other online portals; and
j. Other similar or analogous discriminatory acts.
Article XII. Protection of HIV, Educators, Licensed Social Workers, Health Workers and Other HIV and AIDS Service Providers from Harassment
SECTION 1. Consistent with the national HIV and AIDS laws, except when committing acts in violation thereof, any person involved in the provision of HIV and AIDS services, including peer educators, shall be protected from suit, arrest or prosecution, and from civil, criminal or administrative liability, on the basis of their delivery of such services in HIV prevention.
Article XIII. Confidentiality of Information
SECTION 1. The DCAC shall ensure confidentiality in all matters pertaining to STI, HIV and AIDS as provided for in the national HIV and AIDS laws and regulations, and other related policy issuances and guidelines.
a. Disclosure of confidential HIV and AIDS information - Unless authorized by law, it shall be unlawful to disclose, without written consent, information that a person has AIDS, has undergone HIV related test, has HIV infection, or HIV related illnesses or has been exposed to HIV.
The prohibition shall apply to any person, natural or juridical, whose work or function involves the implementation of this act or the delivery of related HIV services, including persons who handle or have access to data or information in the workplace, and who, pursuant to the receipt of the required written consent from the subject of confidential HIV and AIDS information, have consequently been granted access to the same confidential information.
b. Media Disclosure - It shall be unlawful for any editor, publisher, reporter, or columnist, in case of printed materials or any announcer or producer, in case of television and radio broadcasting, or any producer or director of films, in case of motion industry, to disclose the name, picture or any information which should reasonably identify the person living with HIV and AIDS, or any confidential HIV and AIDS information without the prior written consent of their subjects, except when the persons waive said confidentiality through their own acts and omission under Section 4 (a) of Republic Act No. 10175, otherwise known as the "Cybercrime Prevention Act of 2012" and Section 25 of Republic Act No. 10173, otherwise known as the "Data Privacy Act of 2012".

--- [Page 21] ---
**Page 21 of 24  
Ord. No. 0707-24**

**Section 2. EXCEPTIONS - Confidential HIV and AIDS information may be released by HIV testing facilities without consent in the following instances:**

a. When complying with reportorial requirements of the national active and passive surveillance system of DOH; Provided that the information related to a person's identity shall remain confidential;

b. When informing other health workers directly involved in the treatment or care of a PLHIV; Provided that such worker shall be required to perform the duty of shared medical confidentiality;

c. When responding to a subpoena duces tecum and subpoena ad testificandum issued by a court with jurisdiction over a legal proceeding where the main issue is the HIV status of an individual; Provided that the confidential medical record, after having been verified for accuracy by the head of the office or department, shall remain confidential; Provided further, that the confidential medical record shall be held by the custodian, hand delivered to the court, and personally opened by the judge; Provided further, that the judicial proceedings shall be held in executive session.

**SECTION 3. DISCLOSURE OF HIV RELATED TEST RESULT - The result of any test related to HIV shall be disclosed by the trained service provider who conducts pre-test and post-test counseling only to the individual who submitted to the test. If the patient is below fifteen (15) years old, the original test result will be incapacitated, the result may be disclosed to either of the patient's parents or legal guardian or qualified licensed social worker or health worker, whichever is applicable; Provided that when a person below fifteen (15) years of age and not suffering from any mental incapacity, in accordance with Section 29(b) of RA No. 11,166, the result of the test shall be disclosed to the child. Provided further that the child should be given age-appropriate counseling and access to necessary healthcare and sufficient support services.

Anonymized and confidential reports shall be given to a person authorized to receive said reports in conjunction with the DOH mandate as provided in Section 43 of RA 11,166.

**SECTION 4. DISCLOSURE TO PERSONS WITH POTENTIAL EXPOSURE TO STI AND HIV - Any person who, after having been tested, is found to be infected with STI and HIV is encouraged to disclose his/her health condition to the spouse or sexual partner and/or family members, regardless of their sex or any potential exposure to HIV. The person may seek help from health providers in order for him/her to notify and advise the partners who may have been exposed to infection.

The DCAC, through the CHD-RHWC, shall establish an enabling environment to encourage newly tested HIV-positive individuals to disclose their status to partners.

**SECTION 5. CIVIL LIABILITY - A person who has obtained knowledge of confidential STI, HIV and AIDS information and has used such information to malign or cause damage, injury or loss to another person may face liability under Section 50(h) of Republic Act No. 11,166, otherwise known as the "Philippine HIV and AIDS Policy Act".**

**Article XIV. Passage of a Barangay STI, HIV and AIDS Ordinance and Localization of City's STI, HIV, and AIDS Plan**

**SECTION 1. BARANGAY STI, HIV AND AIDS ORDINANCE - All Barangays shall come up with a Barangay STI, HIV, and AIDS Ordinance with a designated HIV focal person defining the structures and functions, programs for implementation and corresponding budgetary allocation.**

--- [Page 22] ---
**Page 22 of 24  
Ord. No. 0707-24**

**SECTION 2. INTEGRATION OF HIV/AIDS PREVENTION PROGRAMS IN THE BARANGAY DEVELOPMENT PLAN** - The Barangay Council's programs, projects, and activities, spearheaded by its Committee on Health to address STI, HIV, and AIDS shall be integrated into the Barangay Development Plan. The Liga ng mga Barangay, in coordination with City DILG and CHO-HPU, shall provide assistance to the respective barangay councils in developing their own local HIV and AIDS Plan, including its operationalization and investment components.

**SECTION 3. MONITORING AND REPORTING** - The Liga ng mga Barangay President shall lead in ensuring, monitoring, and reporting to the DCAC, Barangay compliance with the mandates of this Ordinance.

**SECTION 4. ROLE OF THE SANGUNIANG KABATAAN** - The Sangguniang Kabataan shall also include programs, projects, and activities relative to health education, specifically IEC, STI, HIV, and AIDS.

**Article XV. Commemoration of the International AIDS Candlelight Memorial and Designation of HIV and AIDS Awareness Month**

**SECTION 1.** The International AIDS Candlelight Memorial shall be commemorated annually in the month of May.

**SECTION 2.** December 1 of each year, aligned with the international campaign, the World AIDS Day, and the entire month of December each year, are designated as HIV and AIDS Awareness Day and Month, respectively.

**SECTION 3. ADVOCACY PROGRAMS** - There shall be advocacy programs for the whole month of May and December for the dissemination of information for the prevention and control of STI, HIV, and AIDS.

**Article XVI. Penal Provisions**

**SECTION 1.** Unless otherwise prohibited, defined, and penalized under Republic Act No. 11166, or specifically defined and provided herein, any persons found guilty of violating any provisions of this Ordinance shall be meted with the following penalties:

a. First Offense - A fine of P2,000 and/or imprisonment of (1) month

b. Second Offense - A fine of P3,000 and/or imprisonment of three (3) months

c. Third Offense - A fine of P5,000 and/or imprisonment of six (6) months and/or cancellation of business permit.

**SECTION 2. REDRESS MECHANISM** - The DCAC, through the City Legal Office and relevant City Departments or Offices, in coordination with the Commission on Human Rights (CHR), Public Attorney's Office (PAO), and other agencies, shall establish a City-level redress mechanism for persons living with HIV to ensure that their civil, political, economic, and social rights are protected.

**Article XVII. Appropriation**

**SECTION 1. APPROPRIATION** - The City shall allocate funds for the mandates under this Ordinance which shall be based on and responsive to the local STI, HIV, and AIDS situation, including projects and operations of the Davao City AIDS Council.

--- [Page 23] ---
Page 23 of 24
Ord. No. 0707-24

Article XVIII. Final Provisions

SECTION 1. IMPLEMENTING RULES AND REGULATIONS - The City Mayor's Office together with the Davao City AIDS Council shall, within a period of one month but not to exceed six months, formulate and issue appropriate rules and regulations necessary for the implementation of this Ordinance.

Article XIX

SECTION 1. SEPARABILITY CLAUSE - If, for any reason, any section or provision of this Ordinance is declared unconstitutional or invalid, other sections or provisions hereof which are not affected thereby shall continue to be in full force and effect.

Article XX

SECTION 1. REPEALING CLAUSE - Any provisions of City Ordinance No. 041-02, Series of 2002, local issuances or rules inconsistent with this Ordinance shall be deemed amended and/or repealed.

Article XXI

SECTION 1. EFFECTIVITY - This Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon approval and publication in a local newspaper of general circulation in Davao City.

ENACTED, December 3, 2024, by a unanimous vote of all the Members of the Sanggunian, there being a quorum.

CERTIFIED CORRECT:

CHARITO N. SANTOS
City Government Department Head II
(Secretary to the Sangguniang Panlungsod)

ATTESTED:

J. MELCHOR B. QUITAIN JR.
Vice Mayor
Presiding Officer
cns/raine

--- [Page 24] ---
Page 24 of 24
Ord. No. 0707-24
APPROVED:
FEB 07 2025
SEBASTIAN Z. DUTERTE
City Mayor
ATTESTED:
ATTY. FRANCIS MARK H. LAYOG
City Administrator
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING CITY ORDINANCE NO. 041-02, SERIES OF 2002, AS AMENDED BY CITY ORDINANCE NO. 069-19, SERIES OF 2019, PROMULGATING POLICIES AND MEASURES FOR THE PREVENTION, TREATMENT, CARE AND SUPPORT OF STI,
HIV AND AIDS IN DAVAO CITY, STRENGTHENING THE DAVAO CITY AIDS COUNCIL, APPROPRIATING FUNDS THEREFOR, AND PROVIDING PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS THEREOF AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES