=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 0715-24 Amend Revenue Code ===

--- [Page 1] ---
Republic of the Philippines
Office of the Sangguniang Panlungsod
City of Davao

20th City Council
46th Regular Session
Series of 2024

Present:
Vice Mayor J. Melchor B. Quitain Jr.
Councillor Marissa S. Abella
Councillor Nilo M. Abellera Jr.
Councillor Luna Maria Dominique S. Acosta
Councillor Maria Elena Dela Cruz Dominique N. Advincula
Councillor Dante L. Apostol Sr.
Councillor Corrado C. Balular
Councillor Jessica M. Bonguyan
Councillor Louie John J. Bonguyan
Councillor Pilar C. Braga
Councillor Jonard D. Dayang
Councillor Maria N. Quiutarte
Councillor Edgar P. Ibayu Jr.
Councillor Richlyn N. Justol-Baguilod
Councillor Diosdado Angelo Junior R. Mahipus
Councillor Rodolfo M. Mande
Councillor Kristine May John Abdul Mercado
Councillor Jose A. Mabini
Councillor Temujin B. Ocampo
Councillor Alberto T. Ungab
Councillor Lorenzo Benjamin D. Villafuerte
Councillor Trisha Ann J. Villaquarte
Councillor Jesus Joseph P. Zozobra III

Absent:
Councillor Bernard E. Al-ag
Councillor Wilberto E. Al-ag
Councillor Ali Ryan S. Alejandre
Councillor Augusto Javier G. Campos III
Councillor Myrna G. L'Dalado-Ortiz

Presiding Officer

Ordinance No. 0715-24
Series of 2024

An Ordinance amending the provisions of Ordinance No. 0291-19, otherwise known as the 2017 Service Code of the City of Davao, as amended, on service conditions, specifically Sections 5, PAR. (30), 79, 97, 229, 230, and 233 to conform to the provisions of ARTA-DTI-DILG-DICT Joint Memorandum Circular No. 1, Series of 2021 and Department of Finance Local Finance Circular No. 001-2022

--- [Page 2] ---
Page 2 of 8
Ord. No. 0715-24

Be it ordained by the Sangguniang Panlungsod of Davao City in session assembled,
that:

SECTION 1. TITLE - This Ordinance shall be known as "AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE PROVISIONS OF ORDINANCE NO. 0291-17, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE '2017 REVENUE CODE OF THE CITY OF DAVAO', AS AMENDED, ON SERVICE CONTRACTORS, SPECIFICALLY SECTIONS 5, PAR. (C30), 79, 97, 229, 231, AND 233 TO CONFORM TO THE PROVISIONS OF ARTA-DTI-DILG-DICT JOINT MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 01, SERIES OF 2021 AND DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE CIRCULAR NO. 0611-2022"

SECTION 2. AUTHORITY - Section 153 of Republic Act No. 7160, otherwise known as the "Local Government Code of 1991", provides that "Local government units may impose and collect such reasonable fees and charges for services rendered."

SECTION 3. AMENDMENTS - The following provisions of Ordinance No. 0291-17, as amended by Ordinance No. 0612-21, Series of 2021, shall be further amended, to wit:
A. Chapter One, Section 5, paragraph (C30) and sub-paragraph (4) shall read as follows:

FROM:

CHAPTER 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS

Section 5. Definition of Terms.

(C30) Contractor - Includes persons, natural or juridical, not subject to professional tax under Section 139 of the Local Government Code of 1991, whose activity consists essentially of the sale of all kinds of services for a fee, regardless of whether or not the performance of the service calls for the exercise or use of the physical or mental faculties of such contractor or his employees.

xxx
xxx
xxx
4) A "Service Contractor" - is any person principally rendering or offering services, whether by manual labor, the use of expertise or with the use of facilities or machines for a fee, such as the following:

xxx
xxx
xxx
Business agents and other independent contractors (juridical or natural) not included among individuals subject to professional tax, and whose activity consists essentially of the sale of all kinds of services directly to clients for a fee. Those individuals with extensive experience in providing services to the public and who have been employed by the Business Bureau for a period of not less than six (6) months shall be considered as service contractors but shall pay only the necessary and applicable fees pertaining to those services provided, excluding those attached to the principal, such as building fee, electronic fee, financial fee, sanitation permit fee, sanitary inspection fee, solid waste fee, plumbing fee, zoning fee, garbage fee, and signboard fee.

4.1) Food Delivery Customers - Any person or persons whether natural or juridical who avails the services of a Food Delivery Rider via phone applications, internet websites or other similar platforms.

--- [Page 3] ---
Page 3 of 8
Ord. No. 0715-24

4.2) Food Delivery Rider or "Riders" - a service contractor which has a relation with an independent food delivery company who delivers food to food delivery customer for a fee.

4.3) Independent Food-Delivery Company - these are persons, partnerships, corporations or other juridical entities who engage in the business of providing food to the general public through phone applications, internet websites or other similar platforms.

xxx
xxx
xxx

As used in this Code, Article Ten. - Graduated Tax on Business, the term "contractor" shall include proprietors or operators of: mine drilling apparatus; dockyards; establishment engaged in the installation of iron or plastic lamps; steam light or heat; smelting plants; establishments for the manufacture of machinery; painting, repainting, upholstering, washing or greasing of vehicles, heavy equipment, recapping and battery charging; furniture shops; establishment for planning or surfacing and re-cutting of lumber and sawmills under contract to saw or cut logs belonging to others; dry-cleaning or dyeing, steam laundries and/or using washing machines establishments; shops for the repair of any kind of mechanical and electrical devices, instrument makers, instrument or shop for the manufacture of machine tools or electrical devices; establishments or lots for parking purposes; tailor shops, dress shops, milliners and hatters, beauty parlors, barbershops, massage clinics, sauna, Turkish baths, slenderizing and body-building salons and similar establishments; photographic studios; funeral parlors, hotels, motels, and lodging houses, apartels, inns, boarding houses and dormitories; arrears and stevedoring, warehousing, or forwarding establishments; printing presses, lithography presses, lithographers, publishers -except those engaged in the publication or printing of any newspaper, magazine, review or bulletin which appears at regular intervals with fixed prices for subscription and sale and which is not devoted principally to the publication of advertisements; business agents, private detectives or watchman agencies; commercial and immigration brokers; cinematographic film owners, lessors and distributors.

TO:

CHAPTER 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS

Section 5. Definition of Terms.

(c30) Contractor - includes persons, natural or juridical, not subject to professional tax under Section 139 of the Local Government Code of 1991, whose activity consists essentially of the sale of all kinds of services for a fee, regardless of whether or not the performance of the service calls for the exercise or use of the physical or mental faculties of such contractor or his employees.

4) A "Service Contractor" refers to persons, natural or juridical, principally rendering or offering services, whether by manual labor, the use of expertise or with the use of facilities or machines, for a fee, such as the following:

xxx
xxx
xxx

--- [Page 4] ---
Page 4 of 8
Ord. No. 0715-24

Business agents and other independent contractors, whether natural or juridical, who essentially provide personal services that do not fall under the exercise of a profession, except for individuals or those registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission as a One Person Corporation, and who do not occupy a permanent office space, either within a residence or in any commercial space—such as, but not limited to, home-based workers, freelancers, and those providing temporary or outsourced services outside the local government unit where they have registered their principal office or branch.

Business agents and other independent contractors (juridical or natural) not included among individuals subject to professional tax, and whose activity consists essentially of the sale of all kinds of services directly to clients for a fee, shall be considered as service contractors but shall pay only the necessary and applicable fees pertaining to the services provided, particularly: property taxes, principal, such as building fee, electronic fee, mechanical fee, sanitation permit fee, sanitary inspection fee, solid waste fee, plumbing fee, zoning fee, garbage fee, and signboard fee.

As used in this Code, Article Ten. - Graduated Tax on Business, the term "contractor" shall include proprietors or operators of mine drilling apparatus; dockyards; establishment engaged in the installation of water system and gas or electric light or heat; smelting plants; engraving, plating, or plastic laminating establishments; establishment for repairing, repainting, upholstering, washing or greasing of vehicles, heavy equipment, vulcanizing, incapping, or covering changing furniture shops; establishment for planning or surfacing and re-cutting of lumber, sawing, unloading of saw or cut wood belonging to others; dry-cleaning or dyeing, steam laundries and/or dry cleaning establishments; shops for the repair of any kind of mechanical and electrical devices, instruments, apparatus, furniture, or shoe repairing by machine or any mechanical or electrical devices; establishments or lots for parking purposes; tailor shops, dress shops, millinery, haberdashery, beauty parlors, barbershops, massage clinics, sauna, Turkish and Swedish baths, sleighing establishments, photographic studios, establishment for entertainment, photographic studios; funeral parlors; arrastra and stevedoring, warehousing, or forwarding establishments; smiths, or sign painters; printers, bookbinders, lithographers, publishers—except those engaged in the publication or printing of any newspaper, magazine, review or bulletin which appears at regular intervals with fixed prices for subscribers, and which is not devoted principally to the publication of advertisements; businesses of chauffeurs, messengers, and contractors as described in the preceding paragraph; private detectives or watchmen agencies; commercial and immigration brokers; cinematographic film owners, lessors and distributors.

B. Chapter 2, Article Eleven, Section 79 shall read as follows:

FROM:

Article Eleven. - Situs of the Tax

Section 79. Situs of the Tax

(b) Sales Allocation

--- [Page 5] ---
5. In cases where there are two (2) or more factories, project offices, plants or plantations located in different localities, the seventy percent (70%) sales allocation shall be pro-rated among the localities where such factories, project offices, plants and plantations are located in proportion to their respective volumes of production during the period for which the tax is due.

In the case of project offices of services and other independent contractors, the term production shall refer to the costs of projects actually undertaken during the tax period.

6. The foregoing sales allocation under par. (3) hereof shall be applied irrespective of whether or not sales are made in the locality where the factory, project office, plant or plantation is located. In case of sales made by the factory, project office, plant or plantation, the sale shall be covered by paragraph (1) or (2) above.

7. In case of manufacturers or producers which engage the services of an independent contractor to produce or manufacture some of their products, the rules on situs of taxation provided in this article as clarified in the paragraphs above shall apply except that the factory or plant and warehouse of the contractor utilized for the production or storage of the manufacturer's products shall be considered as the factory or plant and warehouse of the manufacturer.

TO:

Section 79. Situs of the Tax.

(b) Sales Allocation

6. In the case of project offices of services and other independent contractors, the term production shall refer to the costs of projects actually undertaken during the tax period.

7. Personnel deployed by a service contractor to its client shall not be liable to pay local business tax to the City Government of Davao where it is being deployed. Likewise, employees who are telecommuting or in a work-from-home arrangement shall not be liable to pay local business tax in the City of Davao where it is telecommuting or working from home.

8. In case of manufacturers or producers which engage the services of an independent contractor to produce or manufacture some of their products, the rules on situs of taxation provided in this article as clarified in the paragraphs above shall apply except that the factory or plant and warehouse of the contractor utilized for the production or storage of the manufacturer's products shall be considered as the factory or plant and warehouse of the manufacturer.

C. Chapter 3, Article One, Section 97 shall read as follows:

FROM:

Section 97. Rules and Regulations on Certain Establishments.

--- [Page 6] ---
Page 6 of 8
Ord. No. 0715-24

(I) A business establishment or entity with existing service agreement with independent service contractors shall furnish the City Mayor or his duly authorized representative a complete list of said service contractors. The owner or operator of said business establishment shall not allow any independent service contractors to commence operation without first securing their own Mayor's Permit to operate; and that said establishment or entity shall not accept any unregistered vendors or merchants to form part of its operation.

(I.A) In addition to the business permit, the Delivery Food Riders shall pay the following fees, to wit:

1. Business Permit P 1,000.00
2. Barangay Clearance 100.00
3. Tax Clearance 50.00
4. Delivery Vehicle Sticker 200.00
5. Health Certificate Fee 50.00
6. Laboratory Fee 80.00
7. Other applicable fees Total P 1,480.00

TO:

Section 97. Rules and Regulations on Certain Establishments.

I. An entity conducting business within the City of Davao, which engages with individuals rendering personal service for a fee, whether under a contract of employment or not, such as, but not limited to, delivery riders and temporary or outsourced personnel, including those who are in a telecommuting or in a work-from-home arrangement, shall furnish the City Mayor or his duly authorized representative a complete list of said individuals. The owner or operator of such business establishment shall not allow said individuals to provide services without first securing an occupational permit with the City.

J. Owners or operators of delivery applications shall not accept any vendors or merchants with no Mayor's Permit to form part of its operation.

D. Article Twenty-Seven, Sections 229, 231, and 233, shall read as follows:

FROM:

Article Twenty-Seven. - Permit Fee on Occupation or Calling Not Requiring Government Examination

Section 229. Imposition of Fee. - The following workers or employees nonholder of validly issued Professional Tax Receipts whether working on temporary and permanent basis, shall secure the individual Occupational Permit at the moment they are actually accepted by the management of any business or industrial establishment to start work and shall pay an annual permit fee at the rate of One Hundred Twenty-Five Pesos (P125.00).

Section 231. Time and Manner of Payment. - The fees prescribed in this Article shall be paid to the City Treasurer upon filing of the application for the first time and annually thereafter within the first twenty (20) days of January of each year. The permit fee is payable for every separate or distinct occupation or calling engaged in. Employer shall advance the fees to the City for its employees.

--- [Page 7] ---
Page 7 of 8
Ord. No. 0715-24
Section 232. Surcharge for Late Payment: Failure to pay the fee prescribed in this Article within the time prescribed shall subject a taxpayer to a surcharge of twenty-five percent (25%) of the original amount of the fee due; such surcharge shall be paid at the same time and in the same manner as the tax due.

Newly hired workers and/or employees shall secure their individual Mayor's Permit from the moment they are actually accepted by the management of any business or industrial establishment to start working.

For individuals who are engaged in an occupation or calling without any employer, the individual Mayor's Permit shall be renewed also within the first twenty (20) days of January of each year.

TO:

Section 229. Imposition of Fee: Workers or employees who are non-holders of valid issued Professional Tax Receipts, whether working on a temporary and permanent basis, temporary or outsourced personnel, including those who are in a telecommuting or in a WPHI arrangement, deployed by a service contractor doing business with the City, or by an individual or OPC who provides personal services that does not fall under the exercise of profession and do not occupy a permanent work or retail space, whether inside the residence or in any commercial space, such as, but not limited to, delivery riders, shall secure an Individual Occupational Permit at the moment they are actually accepted by the management of any business or industrial establishment to commence work or render service and shall pay an annual permit fee at the rate of One Hundred Twenty-Five Pesos ($125.00).

Section 231. Time and Manner of Payment: The fees prescribed in this Article shall be paid to the City Treasurer upon filing of the application for the first time and annually thereafter on or before January 31 of each year. The permit fee payable for every separate occupation or calling shall be paid by the employer to the employee and by the service contractor who deploys temporary or outsourced personnel and engages individuals or OPC who provide personal services that does not fall under the exercise of profession and do not occupy a permanent work or retail space shall advance the fees to the City for its employees.

Section 232. Surcharge for Late Payment: Failure to pay the fee prescribed in this Article within the time prescribed shall subject a taxpayer to a surcharge of twenty-five percent (25%) of the original amount of the fee due; such surcharge shall be paid at the same time and in the same manner as the tax due.

SECTION 4. SEPARABILITY CLAUSE: If, for any reason, any section or provision of this Ordinance is declared unconstitutional or invalid, other sections or provisions hereof not affected by such declaration shall continue to be in full force and effect.

SECTION 5. REPEALING CLAUSE: All Ordinances and issuances that are contrary to or inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed or modified accordingly.

SECTION 6. EFFECTIVE: This Ordinance shall take effect TEN (10) DAYS after its publication in a newspaper of general circulation.

--- [Page 8] ---
Page 8 of 8
Ord. No. 0715-24
ENACTED on the 5th day of December 2024, by a unanimous vote of all the Members of the Sanggunian, there being a quorum.
CERTIFIED CORRECT:
CHARITO N. SANTOS
City Government Department Head II
(Secretary to the Sangguniang Panlungsod)
ATTESTED:
J. MELLO
B. QUITAIN JR.
Vice Mayor
Presiding Officer
cnj/josh
APPROVED: JAN 15 2025
SEBASTIAN Z. DUTERTE
City Mayor
ATTESTED:
ATTY. FRANCIS MARK H. LAYOG
City Administrator
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING THE PROVISIONS OF ORDINANCE NO. 0291-17, OTHERWISE KNOWN AS THE "2017 REVENUE CODE OF THE CITY OF DAVAO" AS AMENDED, ON SERVICE CONTRACTORS, SPECIFICALLY SECTIONS 5, PAR. (C)(I), 79, 97, 229, 231, AND 233 TO CONFORM TO THE PROVISIONS OF ARTA-DT1-DILG-DICT JOINT MEMORANDUM CIRCULAR NO. 1, SERIES OF 2021 AND DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE LOCAL FINANCE CIRCULAR NO. 001-2022.
