=== ORDINANCE: Ordinance No. 000742-21 ===

--- [Page 1] ---
Republic of the Philippines
City of Davao
Office of the Sangguniang Panlungsod

19th City Council
40th Regular Session
Series of 2021

PRESENT:
Councillor Ralph O. Abella
Councillor Maria Belen S. Acosta
Councillor Bai Hundra Cassandra Dominique N. Advincula
Councillor Wilberto E. Al-ag
Councillor Dante L. Apostol Sr.
Councillor Conrado C. Baluran
Councillor Emilio B. Bonguyan
Councillor Louie John B. Bonguyan
Councillor Pilar C. Braga
Councillor Augusto Javier G. Campos III
Councillor Danilo C. Dayanghirang
Councillor Jonard C. Dayap
Councillor Edgar P. Ibyuan Jr.
Councillor Edgar R. Ibyuan Sr.
Councillor Diosdado Angelo Junior R. Mahipus
Councillor Pamela A. Librado-Morata
Councillor Jaffar U. Marohomsalic
Councillor Bonifacio E. Militar
Councillor Myrna G. L'Balado-Ortiz
Councillor J. Melchor B. Quitain Jr.
Councillor Alberto T. Ungal
Councillor Manuel M. Villafuerte
Councillor Jesus Joseph P. Zozobrado III

ABSENT:
Vice Mayor Sebastian Z. Duterte
Councillor Nilo D. Abella
Councillor Richelyn N. Justol-Baguilod
Councillor Antoinette G. Principe-Castrodes

ORDINANCE NO. 0742-21
Series of 2021

AN ORDINANCE CREATING THE PUBLIC SAFETY AND SECURITY OFFICE IN THE CITY OF DAVAO, DEFINING ITS DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS FOR THE PURPOSE

--- [Page 2] ---
Page 2 of 35
Ord. No. 0742-21
SECTION 1. TITLE -This Ordinance shall be referred to as "AN ORDINANCE CREATING THE PUBLIC SAFETY AND SECURITY OFFICE IN THE CITY OF DAVAO, DEFINING ITS DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS FOR THE PURPOSE".
SECTION 2. DECLARATION OF PRINCIPLES AND POLICIES -
A. Article 2, Section 5 of the 1987 Philippine Constitution provides that the maintenance of peace and order, the protection of life, liberty and property, and the promotion of the general welfare are essential for the enjoyment by all the people of the blessings of democracy;
B. Section 16 of Republic Act No. 7160 or the Local Government Code of 1991, mandates all local government units to ensure and maintain peace and order within their respective areas of jurisdictions, among other concerns;
C. Section 454 (c) (2) of Republic Act No. 7160, otherwise known as the Local Government Code of 1991, empowers the Sangguniang Panlungsod to create such offices as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of the City Government;
D. Section 77 of Republic Act No. 7160 states "The chief executive of every local government unit shall be responsible for human resources and development of his unit and shall take all personnel actions in accordance with the Constitutional provisions on civil service, pertinent laws, and rules and regulations thereon, including such policies, guidelines and standards as the Civil Service Commission may establish: Provided, That the local chief executive may employ emergency or casual employees or laborers paid on a daily wage or piecework basis and hired through job orders for local projects authorized by the Sangguniang Panlungsod, without need of approval and attestation by the Civil Service Commission: Provided, further, That the period of employment of emergency or casual laborers as provided in this Section shall not exceed six (6) months.";
E. Section 458 (a) (i), (vii) and (viii) of the Local Government Code of 1991 authorizes the Sangguniang Panlungsod to determine positions, powers, duties and salaries of officials and employees of the City;
F. Executive Order No. 18, Series of 2012, issued by the City Mayor of Davao created the Public Safety and Security Command Center (PSSCC), defining its functions and appropriating funds for the purpose;
G. The City Government of Davao's innovative and coordinated approach on providing protection, security, safety and risk management to its stakeholders leads to the creation of the Public Safety and Security Command Center (PSSCC) through Executive Order No. 18, Series of 2012. With effectiveness and efficiency, PSSCC monitors essential information and orchestrates effective responses to situations and trends that affect public safety, order and security of the people who live, work, study, visit, and invest in Davao City through appropriate technological solutions and highly proficient, capable and service-oriented people.

--- [Page 3] ---
**SECTION 3. DEFINITION OF TERMS AND ACRONYMS**

Republic Act No. 7160, otherwise known as the "Local Government Code of 1991," applies primarily to all local governments - provinces, cities, municipalities, and barangays in the Philippines. It also affects officials, offices, and agencies of the national government as far as their relationship with the local governments is concerned. The Code does not apply to the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao (ARMM). Being an Autonomous Region, it has its own Local Government Code of 1991, Republic Act No. 7160, by the Local Government Academy and the Department of the Interior and Local Government.

Plantilla: Regular employees hold permanent positions in the government and enjoy a full employer-employee relationship. They are entitled to full benefits under the law including GSIS, PhilHealth, and Pag-Ibig fund membership; paid vacation and sick leaves; and terminal leave (Filipinknow.net).

Job Order: Refers to piece work ("pakyaw") or intermittent or emergency jobs such as clearing of debris on the roads, canals, waterways, etc., after natural/ man-made disasters/occurrences and other manual/trades and crafts services such as carpentry, plumbing, electrical, and the like. These jobs are of short duration and for a specific piece of work. (Civil Service Commission)

Contract of Service: The engagement of the services of an individual, private firm, other government agency, non-governmental agency or international organization as consultant, learning service provider or technical expert to undertake a special project or job within a specific period. It also provides that the term of contract between the agency and the individual contractor shall be for a maximum period of one year, renewable at the option of the Head of the procuring entity, but in no case shall exceed the term of the latter. (Civil Service Commission)

RA: Republic Act

EO: Executive Order

SG: Salary Grade, a number that defines the amount of monthly payment/income that a government employee receives; Salary Grade runs from 1 to 33

ICT: Information and Communications Technology

--- [Page 4] ---
Page 4 of 35
Ord. No. 0742-21
PSSCC
Public Safety and Security Command Center, created under
Executive Order No. 18, Series of 2012
PSSO
Public Safety and Security Office, proposed office in lieu of the
Ad Interim Office of the PSSCC
DBM
Department of Budget and Management
VIP
Abbreviation for Very Important Person, a person of great
influence or prestige (Merriam-Webster dictionary)
CPU
Central Processing Unit
CSC
Civil Service Commission
CCTV
Closed-circuit Television
SECTION 4. CREATION OF PUBLIC SAFETY AND SECURITY OFFICE
IN THE CITY OF DAVAO - A Public Safety and Security Office (PSSO) in the City of Davao Shall be created.
A. The PSSO shall be headed by a City Government Department Head II (Public Safety and Security Officer) with Salary Grade 26;
B. The City Government Assistant Department Head II (Assistant Public Safety and Security Officer) shall be the Assistant
Department Head with Salary Grade 24;
C. The organizational structure of the PSSO shall be composed of
the following divisions and sections:
1. Administrative Division;
2. Operations and Coordination Division;
a. Civil Security Section;
b. Public Safety and Security Operations Section;
c. Special Projects Operations Section;
3. Intelligence Coordination Division;
a. Intelligence Production Section;
b. Intelligence Dissemination Section;
4. Information System and Technology Management Division;
a. ICT Development Section;
b. ICT Management and Support Section;
5. Development and Training Division;
a. Planning and Research Section;
b. Training and Development Section;
SECTION 5. DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS OF THE PUBLIC SAFETY AND
SECURITY OFFICE (PSSO) - The Public Safety and Security Office (PSSO) shall:
A. Serve as the command, control and coordinating area during day
to day activities, crisis and combined security operations;
B. Develop, create and operate an alternate command and control
center as the need arises;
C. Develop and support effective crime prevention and crime
reduction programs based on data gathered;

--- [Page 5] ---
Page 5 of 35
Ord. No. 0742-21

D. Design, coordinate, facilitate, oversee, analyze, and evaluate the Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) and the training of civilians, barangay functionaries, and LGU employees as well as the conduct of Joint Exercises between and among the Security Units, Offices, and will be part of the full deployment of the Safe City Concept;

E. Formulation, implementation, and evaluation of long-range and short-range development plans, programs, and projects through comprehensive and systematic researches, studies, and surveys on matters relating to Safety and Security;

F. Design and implement a system that allows for the information to be collected, processed, and archived by technological means for use of the office as well as to be distributed to offices, agencies, and units relevant to security deployment;

G. Design and implement projects and systems pursuing technological upgrades and the maintenance of said projects and systems with the objective of making the City a Safe City in terms of Security and Safety;

H. Analyze and evaluate the Proposed Security Plan for government and private events for the approval and issuance of a Security Clearance or Special Mayor's Permit;

I. Acquire and constantly maintain and upgrade digital systems in order to prevent data loss or breach;

J. Provide necessary support as directed to Security Units, Offices, and Local Government Agencies in the field of Information and Communication Technology relative to the implementation and maintenance of the Security, Safety, and Public Order of the City;

K. Provide a framework for collaboration, coordination, and inter-operability of all offices, agencies, and units involved in the safety, security, and crime prevention network;

L. Oversee the City-wide Surveillance System through the Public Safety and Security Operations Section;

M. Monitor events, situations, issues, and developments in the country and overseas that may affect the local safety and security situation of the City and subsequently interpreting, analyzing, and providing constant updates and exchanges of information regarding said matters to the Security Cluster in order to maximize all resources needed to address said matters;

N. Identify potential criminal, terrorism, and insurgency targets in the City in order to determine and implement the appropriate security measures to ensure the safety of lives and property;

O. Adopt and facilitate PSSO clusters comprising of law enforcement agencies, military units, public safety agencies and intelligence agencies that shall adhere to a city-wide scope and shall facilitate information exchange including its dissemination;

--- [Page 6] ---
Page 6 of 35  
Ord. No. 0742-21  

P. Manage the operations of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (AUVs)/ Remotely Piloted Aircrafts (RPA) during emergency and disaster situations and for security surveillance purposes;  
Q. Manage the periodic registration of all drones and RPA's under seven (7) kilograms that are operated by private persons, establishments, non-profit organizations, non-commercial, hobbyists, recreational, and/or sports purposes, within the City, with the assistance and coordination of the Civil Aviation Authority of the Philippines (CAAP): Davao City Office;  
R. Plan, direct, and coordinate all administrative functions as well as the formulation of administrative policies and the enforcement of appropriate sanctions;  
S. Protect City Government Properties, Natural Resources, and Infrastructure incorporating sustainable development goals;  
T. Perform other functions as the City Mayor may direct;  

SECTION 6. DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE DIVISION - The Administrative Division shall:  
A. Plan, direct, and coordinate Personnel Administration Function, Record Management Function and other related administrative function;  
B. Formulate administrative policies to improve existing systems and procedures for effective and efficient delivery of services;  
C. Oversee implementation of office policies and enforcement of appropriate sanctions;  
D. Prepare and submit documents required by the City Government;  
E. Perform other tasks as may be required pursuant to this Ordinance.  

SECTION 7. DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS OF THE OPERATIONS AND COORDINATION DIVISION - The Operations and Coordination Division shall:  
A. Prepare, propose plans and execute approved programs, projects and other initiatives to enhance coordination, collaboration and improved inter-operability capacities of various responders in the government and private sectors for planned events, emergency situations and disaster operations;  
B. Assist in promoting and propagating the widespread use of the Incident Command System among government agencies/ offices and private establishments/ institutions/ organizations in the safety and security clusters;  
C. Analyze and evaluate, together with the members of the Security and Safety Clusters, the proposed Security Plan for the approval and issuance of a Special Mayor's Permit;  
D. Establish crisis management and contingency planning;

--- [Page 7] ---
**Page 7 of 35**

**Ord. No. 0742-21**

E. Develop emergency procedures and incident responses;

F. Manage and supervise the operations of the City-wide Surveillance System;

G. Maintain inter-agency coordination with the different members of the Safety and Security clusters regarding matters;

H. Coordinate with the Bantay Bukid Volunteers in monitoring the watersheds, natural resources, and rainforests of the City;

I. Provide security assistance in the monitoring of government properties, and the tribal areas in the City against encroachers and illegal settlers;

J. Monitor the structural integrity of the dikes and the coastal road and report any damages that may be caused by human or natural intervention;

K. Operate Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (AUVs)/ Remotely Piloted Aircrafts (RPAs) during emergency and disaster situations and for security surveillance purposes;

L. Manage the registration, evaluation, and release of permits for Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (AUVs)/ Remotely Piloted Aircrafts (RPAs) below seven (7) kilograms;

M. Conduct demolition operations against illegal/informal settlers who may be damaging and/or compromising the intended purpose of the dike, coastal road, the waters enclosed by the coastal road and all other similar areas;

N. Perform other tasks that may be required pursuant to this Ordinance.

SECTION 8. DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS OF THE INTELLIGENCE COORDINATION DIVISION - The Intelligence Coordination Division shall:

A. Monitor events, situations, issues, and developments in the country and overseas that may affect the local safety and security situation of Davao City;

B. Maintain a constant and up-to-date City risk assessment on criminality, terrorism, and emergencies;

C. Prepare the mapping of barangays, roads, vital installations and areas that are impacted by criminal and terrorist activities: government infrastructure, religious places of worship, multinational corporations, commercial establishments, vital institutions, venues that host large crowds and all other likely targets;

D. Facilitate the exchange of information and intelligence, maximizing resources towards priorities and streamlining law enforcement and martial operations in coordination with other line agencies;

E. Analyze data to identify crime trends and emerging threats and evaluate the effectiveness of crime prevention and crime reduction strategies and programs in coordination with other line agencies;

--- [Page 8] ---
Page 8 of 35  
Ord. No. 0742-21  
F. Facilitate a PSSO Conference Group that shall adhere to the City-wide strategy to examine information exchange including its dissemination;  
G. Facilitate the formulation and implementation of an intelligence sharing system between offices, agencies, and units to the Davao City Local Government Unit;  
H. Perform other tasks as may be required pursuant to this Ordinance.  
SECTION 9. DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS OF THE INFORMATION SYSTEM AND TECHNOLOGY MANAGEMENT DIVISION - The Information System and Technology Management Division shall:  
A. Manage all information communication technology resources in accordance to its needs and priorities which will include planning, developing, testing, implementing, monitoring, maintaining and integrating appropriate technologies and systems into identified areas that will improve the overall efficiency and effectiveness of the Center;  
B. Set direction and plans for the Information and Communications Technology Infrastructure which includes establishment and enforcement of necessary frameworks, standards and procedures pertaining to the administration, management and uses of the information system;  
C. Implement proper archiving procedures or database administration, necessary back up policies and redundancy mechanisms to prevent loss of computer data and information;  
D. Implement the necessary electronic security measures to safeguard sensitive and critical PSSO infrastructures;  
E. Implement necessary preventive maintenance and support to both hardware and software infrastructure systems for optimum performance;  
F. Provide related support to all users of the infrastructure systems which will include end-user training of the implemented solutions at all levels;  
G. Provide necessary consultancy services and assistance to agencies pertaining to the provision of different infrastructure systems to be implemented;  
H. Develop and maintain technological linkages to other cooperating safety and security agencies.  
I. Undertake forward planning and feasibility studies pertaining to the development and implementation of software solutions and other infrastructures and other line agencies that maybe linked to the command center;  
J. Develop, implement and maintain software applications that respond to common needs within the command center;  
K. Continuously conduct research, testing and evaluation of new related technology that may assist in the overall function of the command center.

--- [Page 9] ---
Page 9 of 35  
Ord. No. 0742-21  
L. Perform other tasks as may be required pursuant to this Ordinance.  
SECTION 10. DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS OF THE DEVELOPMENT AND TRAINING DIVISION - The Development and Training Division shall:  
A. Plan, develop, and manage all researches and training programs to ensure adequate knowledge and skills whenever safety and security mechanisms are implemented;  
B. Orchestrate training of CSU personnel and Barangay Tanods in Security and Safety Operations, Emergency Preparedness and Disaster Response;  
C. Design and facilitate the implementation of inter-agency training programs, joint capability exercises and rehearsals;  
D. Formulate, implement, and evaluate long-range and short-range development plans, programs and projects;  
E. Analyze and evaluate the effectiveness and efficiency of Security and Safety Operations, Emergency Preparedness and Disaster Response;  
F. Conduct review, assessment and evaluation of PSSO policies, plans and programs as they relate to the efficient and effective administration and operation of the organization;  
G. Undertake researches, studies and surveys on matters relating to Safety and Security;  
H. Perform other tasks as may be required pursuant to this Ordinance.  
SECTION 11. CREATION OF PSSO PLANTILLA POSITIONS - Pursuant to Section 13 of Civil Service Memorandum Circular No. 13, of 1992 entitled "Guidelines and Standards in the Establishment of Organizational Structure and Staffing Pattern in the Local Government Units, and the DBM's Index of Occupational Services, Occupational Groups, Classes and Salary Grades, the PSSO shall have the minimum regular positions to be created.  
A. Regular positions of Department Head and Assistant Department Head shall be created in the PSSO.  
| Class/Position Title | SG | Number of Positions |
| --- | --- | --- |
| City Government Department Head II (Public Safety and Security Officer) | 26 | 1 |
| City Government Assistant Department Head II (Assistant Public Safety and Security Officer) | 24 | 1 |
  
B. The following regular positions shall be created under the Administrative Division:  
| Class/Position Title | SG | Number of Positions |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Supervising Administrative Officer (Administrative Officer IV) | 22 | 1 |
| Administrative Officer III (Administrative Officer V) | 18 | 1 |
| Administrative Officer I (Supply Officer I) | 10 | 1 |
| Administrative Aide VI (Storekeeper II) | 6 | 1 |
| Administrative Aide III (Driver II) | 4 | 2 |
| Administrative Aide IV (Clerk II) | 4 | 4 |

--- [Page 10] ---
Page 10 of 35  
Ord. No. 0742-21  

C. The following regular positions shall be created under the Operations and Coordination Division:  
1. One(1) regular position of Special Operations Officer IV with Salary Grade 22;  
2. The following regular positions shall be created under the Civil Security Section:  

| Class/Position Title | SG | Number of Positions |
|----------------------|----|--------------------|
| Special Operations Officer III | 18 | 1 |
| Special Operations Officer II | 14 | 2 |
| Special Operations Officer I | 10 | 3 |

3. The following regular positions shall be created under the Public Safety and Security Operations Section:  

| Class/Position Title | SG | Number of Positions |
|-----------------------|----|--------------------|
| Special Operations Officer II | 14 | 1 |
| Special Operations Officer I | 10 | 1 |
| Administrative Assistant III (Computer Operator II) | 9 | 8 |
| Administrative Aide VI (Communications Equipment Operator II) | 6 | 4 |

4. The following regular positions shall be created under the Special Projects Operations Section:  

| Class/Position Title | SG | Number of Positions |
|-----------------------|----|--------------------|
| Special Operations Officer II | 14 | 1 |
| Special Operations Officer I | 10 | 2 |

D. The following regular positions shall be created under the Intelligence Coordination Division:  
1. One(1) regular position of Special Operations Officer IV with Salary Grade 22;  
2. One(1) regular position of Special Operations Officer III with Salary Grade 18;  
3. The following regular positions shall be created under the Intelligence Production Section:  

| Class/Position Title | SG | Number of Positions |
|-----------------------|----|--------------------|
| Special Operations Officer II | 14 | 1 |
| Special Operations Officer I | 10 | 1 |

--- [Page 11] ---
Page 11 of 35
Ord. No. 0742-21

4. The following regular positions shall be created under the Intelligence Dissemination Section:

| Class/Position Title | SG | Number of Positions |
|----------------------|----|--------------------|
| Special Operations Officer II | 14 | 1 |
| Special Operations Officer I | 10 | 1 |

E. The following regular positions shall be created under the Information System and Technology Management Division:

1. One(1) regular position of Information Technology Officer II with Salary Grade 22;
2. One(1) regular position of Information Technology Officer I with Salary Grade 19;

3. The following regular Positions shall be created under the ICT Development Section:

| Class/Position Title | SG | Number of Positions |
|----------------------|----|--------------------|
| Information Systems Analyst II | 16 | 1 |
| Information Systems Researcher I | 12 | 2 |

4. The following regular positions shall be created under the ICT Management and Support Section:

| Class/Position Title | SG | Number of Positions |
|----------------------|----|--------------------|
| Information Systems Analyst II | 16 | 1 |
| Information Systems Analyst I | 12 | 3 |
| Computer Maintenance Technologist I | 11 | 2 |
| Administrative Assistant II (Electronics and Communications Equipment Technician II) | 8 | 4 |

F. The following regular positions shall be created under the Development and Training Division:

1. One(1) regular position of Development Management Officer IV with Salary Grade 22;
2. The following regular positions shall be created under the Planning and Research Section:

| Class/Position Title | SG | Number of Positions |
|----------------------|----|--------------------|
| Planning Officer II | 15 | 1 |
| Planning Officer I | 11 | 1 |

--- [Page 12] ---
3. The following regular positions shall be created under the Training and Development Section

| Class/Position Title | SG | Number of Positions |
|----------------------|----|--------------------|
| Development Management Officer II | 15 | 1 |
| Development Management Officer I | 11 | 1 |

SECTION 12. DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF PLANTILLA POSITIONS - Duties and responsibilities of the different positions in the PSSO shall be as follows:

A. The duties and responsibilities of the City Government Department Head II (Public Safety and Security Officer) are the following:

1. Acts as the responsible officer to the City Mayor on all matters concerning inter-agency coordination, collaboration and interoperability on safety and security concerns in the City;
2. Assists in ensuring the safety and protection of the public against crime through the maintenance of peace and order;
3. Designs an appropriate security system and formulates security policy for approval of the City Mayor;
4. Conducts regular review of office policies and procedure involving security to make sure that measures are responsive to the changing conditions by way of gathering information and data which are confidential;
5. Advises the City Mayor on security matters including the peace and order condition of the City and to develop possible intervention through effective coordination with intelligence force;
6. Creates and maintains good channels of communication and support across various departments and agencies to strengthen security initiatives;
7. Does other work as may be directed by the City Mayor.

B. The duties and responsibilities of the Assistant City Government Department Head II (Assistant Public Safety and Security Officer) are the following:

1. Assists the Public Safety and Security Officer in the performance of his/her duties and responsibilities and in running the operations of the office;
2. Assists the Public Safety and Security Officer in the management and giving direction on the planning, implementation and evaluation of programs and projects of the office;
3. Supervises various operational activities in the office and assumes the duties and functions of the Public Safety and Security Officer in case of absence and/or incapacity;

--- [Page 13] ---
4. Performs such other duties and functions as may be prescribed by law, ordinance, or as may be directed by the Public Safety and Security Officer and/or any superior officers.

C. The duties and responsibilities of the regular positions in the Administrative Division are as follows:

REGULAR POSITION DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Supervising Administrative Officer (Administrative Officer IV)
a. Plans, directs and supervises all administrative activities and performs diversified and complex administrative service functions;
b. Plans, directs and coordinates personnel administration, records management, budget preparation, procurement management, and other related administrative functions;
c. Plans and supervises in the budget preparation process and controlling of budget expenditures to oversee the flow of the financial operations of the office;
d. Formulates administrative policies to improve existing systems and procedures for effective delivery of services;
e. Provides direct supervision that includes conducting performance evaluation in order to identify problem areas and determine solutions and implement changes;
f. Oversees implementation of office policies and enforcement of appropriate sanctions;
g. Supervises and coordinates general services functions;
h. Does other functions as may be directed by the Department Head.

Administrative Officer III (Administrative Officer V)
a. Shall direct and supervise the issuance of supplies and keeps inventory thereof;
b. Assists the Supervising Administrative Officer in the budget preparation process and in controlling budget expenditures of the office;
c. Shall supervise the preparation of all documents relative to the procurement process of supplies, equipment, and materials of the Department;
d. Shall supervise storage and distribution of supplies and materials, tools and equipment for the use of the Department;
e. Does other functions as may be directed by the Department Head.

--- [Page 14] ---
Page 14 of 35
Ord. No. 0742-21
Administrative Officer I
(Supply Officer I)
a. Inspects supplies and materials delivered and maintains a record of its delivery;
b. Prepares Purchase Requests and Purchase Orders;
c. Prepares the Project Procurement Management Plan of the office showing the itemized list as to kind, estimated cost, estimated quantity, description of the property;
d. Prepares and submits inventory report of all office equipment and supplies;
e. Encodes all detailed information of each Acknowledged Receipt of Equipment (ARE) for every accountable officers and employees;
f. Performs other duties as directed.
Administrative Aide VI
(Storekeeper II)
a. Shall conduct the inventory of supplies and fills out forms and prepares requisition in relation to procurement and see to it that delivery is in accordance with specifications;
b. Ensures that items received are properly stored in assigned places and in accordance with established techniques and procedures;
c. Maintains storage areas and ensure the safety of the equipment and supplies;
d. Conduct periodic inventory of all office equipment;
e. Receives, records and controls office supplies and equipment issued;
f. Organize and label all equipment and supplies in the storage;
g. Performs other duties as directed.
Administrative Aide III
(Driver II)
a. Drives service vehicles of the office in transporting officials and/or personnel assigned to conduct field inspections;
b. Transport maintenance crew to different disaster area;
c. Maintains proper handling of service vehicles, spare parts, and gasoline;
d. Performs other duties as directed.

--- [Page 15] ---
Page 15 of 35
Ord. No. 0742-21
Administrative Aide
IV (Clerk II)
a. Types and disseminates information to the general public;
b. Transcribes notes regarding information dissemination;
c. Checks/evaluates documents for correctness;
d. Keeps record of attendance and other personnel records including the updating of records of vacation and sick leave of employees of the office;
e. Performs general office duties such as doing frontline services to clients, sorting of official documents, mails, etc., and answering/making official phone calls;
f. Types, encodes, prepares office payrolls, disbursement vouchers, office correspondence, memoranda, reports and do other typing works;
g. Receives, sorts, records, copies and stamps incoming and outgoing documents;
h. Takes charge of the records keeping of valuable records for file;
i. Shall file and label documents for permanent storage;
j. Receives, releases, records incoming and outgoing communications;
k. Prepare and submit required reports.
l. Performs other duties as directed.
D. The duties and responsibilities of the regular positions of the different sections in the Operations and Coordination Division are as follows:
1. Special Operations Officer IV
a. Assists the Public Safety and Security Officer in supervising the over-all operational activities related to the safety and security of the City;
b. Reports all security plans, activities, incidents, countermeasures, and other operational concerns to the Public Safety and Security Officer;
c. Develops emergency procedures and incident responses;
d. Plans and coordinates security operations for specific events;
e. Implements action plans to monitor and control risk;
f. Establishes crisis management and contingency planning;
g. Reviews, analyzes, and evaluates security operations to identify risks or opportunities to ensure efficiency and quality for improvement of security operations and recommends actions to Public Safety and Security Officer;

--- [Page 16] ---
Page 16 of 35
Ord. No. 0742-21
h. Supervises the operation of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (AUVs)/ Remotely Piloted Aircrafts (RPAs) during emergency and disaster situations for security surveillance purposes;
i. Supervises the registration, evaluation, and release of permits for Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (AUVs)/ Remotely Piloted Aircrafts (RPAs);
j. Supervises the operations of the City-wide Surveillance System;
k. Conducts demolition operations against illegal/informal settlers who may be damaging and/or compromising the intended purpose of the dike and coastal road.
l. Performs other duties as directed.
2. Civil Security Section
REGULAR POSITION DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Special Operations Officer III
a. Supervises day-to-day operations of physical security system to include conduct of periodic physical security inspection, supervision of the implementation of rules and regulations affecting building management such as perimeter, fire/crime prevention, vehicle security, visitor control, VIP security, etc. and direct supervision over security guards and watchmen to ensure safety;
b. Supervises the maintenance of government premises covered by his area of responsibility to ensure safety of employees and walk-in clients;
c. Supervises subordinates in the performance of their respective assigned tasks, training, and other related performance including conduct of discipline to its subordinate;
d. Plans, directs, or coordinates security activities to safeguard office assets, employees, guests, or others on company property;
e. Coordinates security operations or activities with public law enforcement, fire, and other agencies;
f. Supervises the monitoring of the implementation of security policies, programs or procedures to ensure compliance with internal security policies, licensing requirements, or applicable government security requirements, policies, and directives;
g. Supervises the implementation of security standards, policies, and procedures of the office;
h. Attends meetings, professional seminars, or conferences to keep abreast of changes in executive legislative directives or new technologies impacting security operations;
i. Performs other duties as directed.

--- [Page 17] ---
**Page 17 of 35**

**Ord. No. 0742-21**

---

### Special Operations Officer II

a. Monitors security policies, programs, or procedures to ensure compliance with internal security policies, licensing requirements, or applicable government security requirements, policies, and directives;

b. Plans and coordinates security operations for specific events;

c. Conducts, supports, or assists in evaluations, or assessments of the overall effectiveness of the City security processes;

d. Identifies, investigates, or resolves security breaches;

e. Prepares reports or make present conferences actions on internal investigations, losses, or violations of regulations, policies, and procedures;

f. Assists in the conduct of physical examinations of property to ensure compliance with security policies and regulations;

g. Analyzes security data to determine security needs, security program goals, or program activities;

h. Attends meetings, professional seminars, or conferences to keep abreast of changes in executive legislative directives or new technologies impacting security operations;

i. Performs other duties as directed.

---

### Special Operations Officer I

a. Conducts monitoring/supervision of the security guards on their area of assignments to ensure implementation of security measures adopted by the office and keep records of the incidents submitted;

b. Deploys civil security forces during City events in order to monitor or ensure the safety and security of the public and to eliminate possible threats that may occur in such events;

c. Direct supervision over security guards and watchmen to ensure safety;

d. Collects data and other incidental reports submitted and recommends proper action to his immediate supervisor;

e. Communicates/reports security status, updates, and actual or potential problems using established protocols;

f. Performs other duties as directed.

--- [Page 18] ---
3. Public Safety and Security Operations Section

REGULAR POSITION DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Special Operations Officer II a. Assists the Special Operations Officer IV on all matters concerning the Public Safety and Security Operations Section;
b. Directly supervises the daily operations of the City-wide surveillance system;
c. Exercises direct supervision over the personnel under the Public Safety and Security Operations Center Section;
d. Coordinates planning of activities, programs and projects by the officers in the Public Safety and Security Operations Center Section;
e. Submits Monthly Performance Reports and Incident Reports;
f. Performs other duties as directed.

Special Operations Officer I a. Supervises over the work activities, personnel and other resources assigned to the Public Safety and Security Operations Section;
b. Monitors, corrects and disciplines violators in full-duty observance, punctuality and civil behavior of employees directly under him;
c. Submits Weekly Performance Report and consolidates the daily Incident Reports;
d. Performs other duties as directed.

Administrative Assistant III (Computer Operator II) a. Operates the Public Safety and Security Operations Section's (PSSO's) computer applications and systems;
b. Controls and guides the work performance of the radio and CCTV Operators to ensure that they are diligently and competently monitoring occurrences of unusual or significant events, incidents, suspicious persons and/or objects and threatening situations by implementing protocols for such situations;
c. Informs direct supervisor and Department Head whenever unusual or significant occurrences/incidents are observed on the monitors;
d. Relays all relevant information on monitored unusual or significant events, suspicious persons and/or objects and threatening situations to pre-identified appropriate responders;
e. Maintains file security to ensure confidentiality and integrity of records;

--- [Page 19] ---
Page 19 of 35
Ord. No. 0742-21
f. Immediately reports any technical problems encountered that require corrective action;
g. Submits Summary of Monitored Incidents after every shift period;
h. Undertakes the Video Request Procedures;
i. Performs other duties as directed.
Administrative Aide VI (Communications Equipment Operator II)
a. Receives, relays and transmits messages to all authorized receivers of communication;
b. Monitors and tests assigned integrated frequencies in the Public Safety and Security Operations Section (PSSOS) and provides situational updates of significant situations to linked agencies;
c. Monitors the functionality of all frequencies integrated to the Public Safety and Security Operations Section (PSSOS);
d. Reports all relevant information monitored;
e. Reports any technical problems noted/experienced;
f. Maintains a record book of transactions and logs all important messages of all authorized receivers of communication;
g. Performs other duties as directed.
4. Special Projects Operations Section
REGULAR POSITION DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Special Operations Officer II
a. Assists the Special Operations Officer IV on all matters concerning the management of protected areas, water resources, river dikes, and coastal roads;
b. Exercises direct supervision over the personnel under the Special Operations Section;
c. Facilitates the coordination between Bantay Bukid Volunteers in monitoring the watersheds, natural resources, and rainforests of the City;
d. Submits a Monthly Performance;
e. Performs other duties as directed.

--- [Page 20] ---
Page 20 of 35
Ord. No. 0742-21
Special Operations
Officer I
a. Monitors the Davao City protected areas, water resources, river dikes, and coastal roads;
b. Conducts regular inspection in the protected areas in order to prevent illegal settlers and encroachers;
c. Maintains regular coordination with other line agencies on matters related to the security of Davao City's protected areas, water resources, river dikes, and coastal roads;
d. Submits a weekly monitoring report;
e. Performs other duties as directed.
E. The duties and responsibilities of the regular positions of the different sections in the Intelligence Coordination Division are as follows:
1. Special Operations Officer IV
a. Acts as primary staff on all matters concerning intelligence;
b. Supervises the exchange of information and intelligence, maximizing resources towards priorities and streamlining law enforcement and martial operations in coordination with other line agencies;
c. Supervises the collection, production, and dissemination of domestic intelligence for the use of the Public Safety and Security Officer;
d. Reviews, analyzes, and evaluates security operations to identify risks or opportunities to ensure efficiency and quality for improvement of security operations and recommends actions to Public Safety and Security Officer;
e. Performs other duties as directed.
2. Special Operations Officer III
a. Responsible for the performance of the functions of the Intelligence Coordination Section;
b. Supervises subordinates in the performance of their respective assigned tasks and other related performance including conduct of discipline to its subordinates;
c. Develops emergency procedures and incident responses;
d. Implements action plans to monitor and control risk;
e. Establishes crisis management and contingency planning;
f. Performs other duties as directed.

--- [Page 21] ---
3.Intelligence Production Section

REGULAR POSITION DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Special Operations Officer II a. Assists the Special Operations Officer IV on all matters concerning intelligence and responsible for the performance of the functions of the Intelligence Coordination Section;
b. Facilitates in the process of interpretation, evaluation, and analysis of the collected raw data in transforming into finished intelligence information;
c. Acts as Liaison Officer with other military and civilian intelligence agencies, units and offices;
d. Submits a Monthly Intelligence Report;
e. Performs other duties as directed.

Special Operations Officer I a. Assists in the coordination and facilitation of intelligence production;
b. Assists in the coordination of intelligence and counterintelligence requirements of agencies, units and offices;
c. Performs collection, collation, evaluation, analysis, integration, and interpretation of vital and confidential information related to safety and security;
d. Performs other duties as directed.

4. Intelligence Dissemination Section

REGULAR POSITION DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Special Operations Officer II a. Assists the Special Operations Officer IV on all matters concerning intelligence and responsible for the performance of the functions of the Intelligence Coordination Section;
b. Acts as Liaison Officer with other military and civilian intelligence agencies, units and offices;
c. Analyzes feedbacks acquired from end users pertaining to the disseminated intelligence information for further re-evaluation;
d. Submits a Monthly Performance Report;
e. Performs other duties as directed.

Special Operations Officer I a. Assists in the coordination and facilitation of intelligence dissemination;
b. Facilitates in the distribution of finished intelligence information to military and civilian intelligence agencies, units, and offices;

--- [Page 22] ---
Page 22 of 35
Ord. No. 0742-21
c. Gathers and monitors feedbacks of the disseminated finished intelligence information from end users related to safety and security;
d. Performs other duties as directed.
F. The duties and responsibilities of the regular positions of the different sections in the Intelligence Coordination Division are as follows:
1. Information Technology Officer II
a. Acts as primary staff on all matters concerning information systems, communications and technology;
b. Sets the direction and oversees the management of all information system and technology resources of the offices in accordance to its needs and priorities overseeing the stages of planning, developing, testing, implementing, monitoring, maintaining and integrating appropriate technologies and systems;
c. Establishes and enforces necessary frameworks, standards and procedures pertaining to the administration, management and uses of the systems all throughout the PSSO;
d. Develops strategies to be used in the implementation of software and hardware systems in the PSSO;
e. Directs the conduct of technological research necessary for the improvement of the systems used by the office;
f. Provides training and necessary assistance for the employees involved in the implementation and maintenance of the software systems;
g. Collects necessary information technology specifications for each division and ensure that all requirements are met;
h. Ensures constant capacity and proficiency building for the technology management personnel;
i. Performs other duties as directed.
2. Information Technology Officer I
a. Assists the Information Technology Officer II in the performance of his/her duties and responsibilities concerning information systems, communications and technology;
b. Recommends information technology strategies, policies, and procedures by evaluating organization outcomes, identifying problems, evaluating trends, anticipating requirements;
c. Performs other duties as directed.
3. ICT Development Section
REGULAR POSITION DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Information Systems Analyst II
a. Executes forward planning and feasibility studies pertaining to the development, integration and implementation of software solutions and other infrastructures;

--- [Page 23] ---
Page 23 of 35
Ord. No. 0742-21
b. Leads in the execution of research, new
development, prototyping, modification,
reuse, re-engineering, maintenance, or any
other activities that results in software
products or other system infrastructure;
c. Leads and monitors all PSSO ICT-related
projects;
d. Supervises the Information Researcher I in the
conduct of research, testing, and handling of
PSSO ICT-related projects;
e. Conducts training for all ICT personnel in the
usage and configuration of the information;
f. Perform other duties as directed by the
supervisor.
Information Systems
Researcher I
a. Assists in the overall operation of all servers,
networks, database, storage, applications and
linkages to other agencies including the
implementation of necessary system security;
b. Verifies application result by conducting
system audits of technologies implemented;
c. Coordinates with the ICT Management and
Support Section in the facilitation and
preservation of technological assets by
implementing disaster recovery and backup
procedures, information security and control
structures and necessary preventive
maintenance;
d. Aids in the overall development and
implementation of software solutions and
other system infrastructure;
e. Conducts research, testing and evaluation
of new related technology that may improve
the overall function of the Office;
f. Assists the Systems Analyst II in implementing
and monitoring of PSSO Information
Communication Technology projects;
g. Performs other duties as directed.
4. ICT Management and Support Section
Information Systems
Analyst II
a. Manages the overall operation of all
servers, networks, database, storage,
applications and linkages to other agencies
including the implantation of necessary
system security;
b. Administrators the implementation of
necessary corrective and preventive
maintenance and support to both hardware
and software infrastructure system for
optimum performance;

--- [Page 24] ---
Page 24 of 35
Ord. No. 0742-21
c. Facilitates the preservation of technological assets by implementing disaster recovery and backup procedures, information security and control structures and necessary preventive maintenance;
d. Oversees the maintenance of the computer system and ensures that all other implemented infrastructure in the PSSO are functioning properly;
e. Executes forward planning pertaining to the external PSSO network connection (wired & wireless);
f. Designs, Plans and Supervises the installation of CCTV's during special events in the City;
g. Supervises subordinates in managing servers, database, storage, and application;
h. Ensures that the technological linkages to other safety and security agencies are well-maintained;
i. Ensures the maintenance of software applications being used within the Office;
j. Performs other duties as directed.
Information Systems Analyst I
a. Ensures that the uptime, performance, resources, and security of the servers meet the needs of the users;
b. Shall be responsible for the upkeep, configuration, and reliable operation of all servers;
c. Performs proper archiving procedures or database administration, necessary back up policies and redundancy mechanism to prevent loss of computer data and information;
d. Checks regularly the overall internal network infrastructure which includes implementation of corrective measures and preventive maintenance to ensure seamless connectivity;
e. Shall be responsible for designing, organizing, modifying, installing, and supporting computer systems such as LANs, WANs, Internet and intranet systems, and network segments;
f. Executes daily system monitoring, verifying the integrity and availability of all hardware, server resources, systems and key processes, reviewing system and application logs, and verifying completion of scheduled jobs such as backups;

--- [Page 25] ---
Page 25 of 35
Ord. No. 0742-21
g. Monitors designated applications and takes corrective action to prevent or minimize system downtime;
h. Assists in developing policies, procedures, programs, scripts, or web pages as required;
i. Develops and maintains a database system, and is responsible for the integrity of the data and the efficiency and performance of the system;
j. Controls data security and setting data privacy;
k. Troubleshoots system related problems; coordinates with relevant System Administrators and/or third-party vendors regarding user support and problem resolution;
l. Monitors and manages storage resources, configuration, migration, provisioning, archiving and storage monitoring/reporting;
m. Provides upper-level support to users having difficulties with applications;
n. Maintains data center environmental and monitoring equipment;
o. Performs other duties as directed.
Computer Maintenance Technologist I
a. Provides technical assistance and support for queries and issues related to computer systems, software, and hardware;
b. Assists in the overall implementation of corrective measure and maintenance;
c. Performs basic computer software and hardware troubleshooting;
d. Performs CCTV and other peripherals troubleshooting;
e. Oversees the overall implementation of corrective measure and maintenance of the CCTV;
f. Maintains seamless connection of City-wide surveillance cameras;
g. Equipment monitoring which includes generator set, air conditioning units (ACU) and Uninterruptable Power Supply (UPS);
h. Supervises Electronics and Communication Equipment Technician in the implementation of corrective measures and maintenance of the CCTV's;
i. Provide related support to all users of infrastructure systems which will include

--- [Page 26] ---
Page 26 of 35
Ord. No. 0742-21
j. Performs ongoing performance tuning, hardware upgrades, and resource optimization as required;
Configure CPU, memory, and disk partitions as required;
k. Coordinates with the supply division regarding spare parts and other requirements;
I. Performs other duties as directed;
Administrative Assistant II (Electronics and Communications Equipment Technician II)
a. Executes maintenance, repair and preventive checks on all communication equipment and base transceivers including all antenna accessories, systems, and other communication equipment;
b. Checks the functionality of the communication servers;
c. Performs corrective measures and maintenance and basic electronics and communications equipment troubleshooting;
d. Repairs and recovers from hardware and/or software failures;
e. Installs all communication equipment, mobile and portable antennas, and transceivers;
f. Performs other duties as directed.
G. The duties and responsibilities of the regular positions in the Development and Training Division
1. Development Management Officer IV
a. Supervises the operations of the Development and Training Division and evaluates the detailed program of activities of the PSSO;
b. Plans, organizes, directs, and controls the implementation of approved research and training programs, projects and other initiatives;
c. Keeps abreast of the latest training and research concepts and methodologies on public safety, order, and security in other key cities and countries;
d. Monitors, evaluates, and provides guidance for the enhancement of job performances of employees;
e. Keeps the PSSO Head well-informed of the official activities and current status of ongoing programs related to training and research;
f. Performs such other functions as directed.

--- [Page 27] ---
2. Planning and Research Section

REGULAR POSITION DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES

Planning Officer II
a. Formulates and evaluates long-range and short-range development plans, programs, and projects;
b. Analyzes and evaluates the effectiveness and efficiency of Security and Safety Operations, Emergency Preparedness, and Disaster Response;
c. Conducts review, assessment, and evaluation of PSSO policies, plans, and programs as they relate to the efficient and effective administration and operation of the organization;
d. Plans, proposes, and supervises the implementation of approved researches, studies, or surveys;
e. Profiles problems which affect or may affect the safety, order, and security of the city;
f. Evaluates the capabilities, strengths, and weaknesses of the city's core safety, security, and emergency responders.
g. Develops linkages with external sources of information and research service providers for their possible future utilization and engagement.
h. Performs such other functions as directed.

Planning Officer I
a. Assists in the actual gathering, documentation, recording, filing of planning documents, policy papers, implementing guidelines and procedures;
b. Assists in the conduct of actual field visits and gathering of data in the preparation of the feasibility studies;
c. Assists in the evaluation of projects and activities;
d. Creates a detailed annual program of activities for the PSSO;
e. Undertakes researches, studies, and surveys on matters relating to Safety and Security;
f. Performs such other functions as directed.

--- [Page 28] ---
**Page 28 of 35**

**Ord. No. 0742-21**

**3. Training and Development Section**

| REGULAR POSITION | DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES |
|-------------------|------------------------------|
| Development        | Management Officer II      |
|                   | a. Plans, proposes, and supervises the implementation and facilitation of approved training and development programs to establish, develop, and improve: |
|                   | - the individual commitment, group cohesion, and job competencies of organic PSSO employees and work groups; |
|                   | - the collaborative efficiency and multi-agency inter-operability effectiveness among all the safety, security, and emergency responders of the city; |
|                   | - the organization and preparedness of emergency management teams in the city. |
|                   | b. Plans, develops, and manages all training programs to ensure adequate knowledge and skills whenever safety and security mechanisms are implemented; |
|                   | c. Performs such other functions as directed. |
| Development        | Management Officer I         |
|                   | a. Monitors, collaborates, cooperates, and participates in the training and development programs conducted by the PSSO and other safety and security clusters for their own organic personnel; |
|                   | b. Develops organizational linkages with external safety and security training providers for their possible future utilization and engagement; |
|                   | c. Orchestrates training of CSU personnel and Barangay Tanods in Security and Safety Operations, Emergency Preparedness, and Disaster Response; |
|                   | d. Performs such other functions as directed. |

**SECTION 13. APPOINTMENT AND QUALIFICATION** - The positions in the Public Safety and Security Office (PSSO) shall be appointed by the City Mayor in accordance with civil service laws and rules. The appointee shall meet the qualification standards set by the Civil Service Commission. The qualifications of the plantilla positions in the PSSO are as follows:

A. City Government Department Head II (Public Safety and Security Officer)

1. Bachelor's degree;
2. Five (5) years experience in public safety and security;
3. Training not required;
4. First Grade Civil Service Eligibility or its equivalent.

--- [Page 29] ---
Page 29 of 35  
Ord. No. 0742-21

B. Assistant City Government Department Head II (Assistant Public Safety  
and Security Officer)  
1. Bachelor's degree;  
2. Three (3) years' experience in public safety and security;  
3. Training not required;  
4. First Grade Civil Service Eligibility or its equivalent.

C. Qualifications of the regular positions in the Administrative Division are as follows:  
1. Supervising Administrative Officer (Administrative Officer IV)  
a. Bachelor's degree relevant to the job;  
b. Three (3) years of relevant experience;  
c. Sixteen (16) hours of relevant training;  
d. Career Service Professional/Second Level Eligibility.  

2. Administrative Officer III (Administrative Officer V)  
a. Bachelor's degree relevant to the job;  
b. Two (2) years of relevant experience;  
c. Eight (8) hours of relevant training;  
d. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.  

3. Administrative Officer I (Supply Officer I)  
a. Bachelor's degree;  
b. One (1) year of relevant experience;  
c. No experience required;  
d. No training required.  

4. Administrative Aide IV (Driver II)  
a. Elementary School graduate;  
b. No experience required;  
c. No training required;  
d. Professional Driver's License (CSC MC 10 s. 2013- Cat. IV).  

5. Administrative Aide VI (Storekeeper II)  
a. Completion of at least two (2) years in college;  
b. No experience required;  
c. No training required;  
d. Career Service (Sub-professional) First Level Eligibility (CSC MC 10 s. 2019).

--- [Page 30] ---
Page 30 of 35  
Ord. No. 0742-21  

6. Administrative Aide IV (Clerk II)  
a. Elementary School graduate;  
b. No experience required;  
c. No training required;  
d. No career service eligibility required (CSC MC 10 s. 2013 - Cat. II).  

D. Qualifications of the regular positions in the Operations and Coordination Division are as follows:  
1. Special Operations Officer IV  
a. Bachelor's degree;  
b. Three (3) years of relevant experience;  
c. Sixteen (16) hours of relevant training;  
d. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.  

2. Civil Security Section  
a. Special Operations Officer III  
i. Bachelor's degree;  
ii. Two (2) years of relevant experience;  
iii. Eight (8) hours of relevant training;  
iv. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.  
b. Special Operations Officer II  
i. Bachelor's degree relevant to the job;  
ii. One (1) year of relevant experience;  
iii. Four (4) hours of relevant training;  
iv. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.  
c. Special Operations Officer I  
i. Bachelor's degree relevant to the job;  
ii. Experience not required;  
iii. Training not required;  
iv. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.  

3. Public Safety and Security Operations Section  
a. Special Operations Officer II  
i. Bachelor's degree relevant to the job;  
ii. One (1) year of relevant experience;  
iii. Four (4) hours of relevant training;  
iv. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.

--- [Page 31] ---
Page 31 of 35  
Ord. No. 0742-21  

b. Special Operations Officer I  
i. Bachelor's degree relevant to the job;  
ii. Experience not required;  
iii. Training not required;  
iv. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.  

c. Administrative Assistant III (Computer Operator II)  
i. Completion of two (2) years studies in college or High School Graduate with relevant vocational/trade course  
ii. One(1) year of relevant experience;  
iii. Four (4) hours of relevant training;  
iv. Eligibility for Data Encoder under CSC MC 6 s. 2010 or Career Service (Sub-Professional) First Level Eligibility (CSC MC 6 s. 2020).  

d. Administrative Aide VI (Communications Equipment Operator II)  
i. Completion of two (2) years studies in college or High School Graduate with relevant vocational/trade course;  
ii. No experience required;  
iii. No trainings required;  
iv. Career Service Eligibility for Communications Equipment Operator (CSC MC 10 s. 2013 - Cat. III).  

E. Qualifications of the regular positions in the Intelligence Coordination Division are as follows:  
1. Special Operations Officer IV  
a. Bachelor's degree;  
b. Three (3) years of relevant experience;  
c. Sixteen (16) hours of relevant training;  
d. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.  

2. Special Operations Officer III  
a. Bachelor's degree;  
b. Two (2) years of relevant experience;  
c. Eight (8) hours of relevant training;  
d. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.  

3. Intelligence Production Section  
a. Special Operations Officer II  
i. Bachelor's degree relevant to the job;  
ii. One (1) year of relevant experience;  
iii. Four (4) hours of relevant training;  
iv. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.

--- [Page 32] ---
Page 32 of 35  
Ord. No. 0742-21  

b. Special Operations Officer I  
i. Bachelor's degree relevant to the job;  
ii. Experience not required;  
iii. Training not required;  
iv. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.  

4. Intelligence Dissemination Section  
a. Special Operations Officer II  
i. Bachelor's degree relevant to the job;  
ii. One (1) year of relevant experience;  
iii. Four (4) hours of relevant training;  
iv. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.  

b. Special Operations Officer I  
i. Bachelor's degree relevant to the job;  
ii. Experience not required;  
iii. Training not required;  
iv. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.  

F. Qualifications of the regular positions in the Information System and Technology Management Division are as follows:  

1. Information Technology Officer II  
a. Bachelor's degree relevant to the job;  
b. Three (3) years of relevant experience;  
c. Sixteen (16) hours of relevant training;  
d. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.  

2. Information Technology Officer I  
a. Bachelor's degree relevant to the job;  
b. Two (2) years of relevant experience;  
c. Eight (8) hours of relevant training;  
d. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.  

3. ICT Development Section  
a. Information Systems Analyst II  
i. Bachelor's degree relevant to the job;  
ii. One (1) year of relevant experience;  
iii. Four (4) hours of relevant training;  
iv. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.

--- [Page 33] ---
Page 33 of 35  
Ord. No. 0742-21  

b. Information Systems Researcher I  
i. Bachelor's degree relevant to the job;  
ii. One (1) year of relevant experience;  
iii. Four (4) hours of relevant training;  
iv. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.  

4. ICT Management and Support Section  
a. Information Systems Analyst II  
i. Bachelor's degree relevant to the job;  
ii. One (1) year of relevant experience;  
iii. Four (4) hours of relevant training;  
iv. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.  

b. Information Systems Analyst I  
i. Bachelor's degree relevant to the job;  
ii. One (1) year of relevant experience;  
iii. Four (4) hours of relevant training;  
iv. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.  

c. Computer Maintenance Technologist I  
i. Bachelor's degree relevant to the job;  
ii. One (1) year of relevant experience;  
iii. Four (4) hours of relevant training;  
iv. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.  

d. Administrative Assistant II (Electronics and Communications Equipment Technician 111)  
i. Completion of two (2) years studies in college or High School Graduate with relevant vocational/trade course;  
ii. One (1) year of relevant experience;  
iii. Four (4) hours of relevant training;  
iv. Career Service Eligibility as Electronics Equipment Technician (CSC MC 10 s. 2013 - Cat. II) or Career Service (Sub-professional) First Level Eligibility (CSC MC 6 s. 2020)  

G. Qualifications of the regular positions in the Development and Training Division  
1. Development Management Officer IV  
a. Bachelor's degree relevant to the job;  
b. Three (3) years of relevant experience;  
c. Sixteen (16) hours of relevant training;  
d. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.

--- [Page 34] ---
2. Planning and Research Section

a. Planning Officer II
i. Bachelor's degree relevant to the job;
ii. One (1) year of relevant experience;
iii. Four (4) hours of relevant training;
iv. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.

b. Planning Officer I
i. Bachelor's degree relevant to the job;
ii. Experience not required;
iii. Training not required;
iv. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.

3. Training and Development Section

a. Development Management Officer II
i. Bachelor's degree relevant to the job;
ii. One (1) year of relevant experience;
iii. Four (4) hours of relevant training;
iv. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.

b. Development Management Officer I
i. Bachelor's degree relevant to the job;
ii. Experience not required;
iii. Training not required;
iv. Career Service (Professional) Second Level Eligibility.

SECTION 14. MANPOWER COMPLEMENT - The City Mayor shall be allowed to employ emergency personnel or laborers needed by the PSSO through Job Orders or Contracts of Service based on the availability of budget pursuant to Section 77 of Republic Act No. 7160, otherwise known as the "Local Government Code of 1991".

SECTION 15. APPROPRIATION - The appropriation necessary for the implementation of this Ordinance shall be included by the City Budget Officer in the proposed Annual Budget of the City Government.

SECTION 16. EFFECTIVITY - This Ordinance shall take effect immediately upon approval.

ENACTED, on the 26th day of October 2021, by an unanimous vote of all the Members of the Sanggunian, there being a quorum.

--- [Page 35] ---
CERTIFIED CORRECT:

CHIATON MANTOS
Secretary to the Senggumfing Penlungsod
(City Government Department Head II)

ATTESTED:
RALPH O. ABELLA
City Foundler
Temporary Presiding Officer
cns/bem

DECEMBER 7, 2021

APPROVED:

SARA Z. DUTERTE
City Mayor

ATTESTED:

ATTY. ZULEIKA T. LOPEZ
City Administrator

AN ORDINANCE CREATING THE PUBLIC SAFETY AND SECURITY OFFICE IN THE CITY OF DAVAO, DEFINING ITS DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS, AND APPROPRIATING FUNDS FOR THE PURPOSE